Atlas
of the World’s
Languages
in
Danger

Editor-in-chief: Christopher Moseley

www.unesco.org/culture/en/endangeredlanguages
The interactive version of the Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger includes
the 2500 languages listed in this print version and provides for each of them
additional data such as alternative names, countries, numbers of speakers, sources
and corresponding ISO 639-3 codes.
This free Internet-based version of the Atlas is interactive: the user can set various
search parameters (vitality, country, number of speakers, name) to filter information
on endangered languages and navigate using a dynamic map interface. All of this
can be done in French, English or Spanish.
Another fundamental feature of this tool allows any user – whether a linguist,
a speaker of an endangered language or anyone with useful information on a
particular endangered language – to submit comments and suggestions online,
thus contributing to the ongoing updating of the digital Atlas and future print
editions.

We invite readers of this print version to use the interactive Atlas to share with
us their comments and suggestions, or to give feedback by sending an email to
atlas@unesco.org.

Atlas of the World’s
Languages in Danger

The authors are responsible for the choice and the presentation of the facts
contained in this publication and for the opinions expressed therein, which
are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this
publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the
part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city
or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or
boundaries.
Published by
the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization
7, place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP

UNESCO wishes to acknowledge the generous support of the Government
of Norway for the publication of this Atlas, in its print and digital forms.

© UNESCO 1st edition 1996, 2nd edition 2001, 3rd edition 2010
All rights reserved

Printed by Imprimerie Leclerc, Abbeville

ISBN 978-92-3-104096-2

Typeset by Jacqueline Gensollen-Bloch, UNESCO Publishing
Copy edited by Jana Gough

Third edition 2010
Printed in France

Atlas of the World’s
Languages in Danger
Third edition, entirely revised, enlarged and updated
Editor-in-Chief: Christopher Moseley
Cartographer: Alexandre Nicolas

UNESCO
Publishing
United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization

Memory of Peoples Series

Preface
by Irina Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO

Over recent decades, as information technologies have brought
more of the world’s knowledge to more of the world’s people
at unprecedented speed, humanity’s linguistic diversity has
been shrinking. That process is inexorable but not inevitable:
international cooperation and well-planned, intelligently
implemented language policies can bolster the ongoing efforts
of speaker communities to maintain their mother tongues and
pass them on to their children, even in the face of powerful forces
pressing them to shift towards larger languages. When UNESCO
published the first edition of the Atlas of the World’s Languages
in Danger in 1996, it sounded an international alarm that has
now been heard by public officials and policy makers, language
communities and scholars, the media and civil society worldwide.
With this third edition – available since February 2009 in an online
digital format – we note that while the gravity and urgency of the
problem of language loss are no less acute today, our tools for
understanding the phenomenon are increasingly effective, and
our repertoire of proven responses continues to grow daily.
Language loss entails an impoverishment of humanity in
countless ways. Each language – large or small – captures and
organizes reality in a distinctive manner; to lose even one closes
off potential discoveries about human cognition and the mind.
The death of a language inevitably leads to the disappearance of
various forms of intangible cultural heritage such as performing
arts, social practices, rituals and festive events, traditional crafts
and the priceless legacy of the community’s oral traditions and
expressions, such as poetry and jokes, proverbs and legends. The
loss of indigenous languages is also detrimental to biodiversity,
as traditional knowledge of nature and the universe, spiritual

Preface

beliefs and cultural values expressed in indigenous languages
provide time-tested mechanisms for the sustainable use of natural
resources and management of ecosystems, which have become
more critical with the emergence of urgent new challenges posed
by climate change.
To complement its set of international standard-setting
instruments aimed at defending cultural diversity as the common
heritage of humanity, UNESCO seeks to provide practical tools
for safeguarding endangered languages such as this publication
and its digital version. Whereas the first edition reported on
600 languages only, and the second included 900, this third
edition has been substantially expanded to include information
on the endangerment status of about three times as many
languages. As a result, the number listed in the present edition
now approaches the estimate generally accepted by linguists of
some 2,500 endangered languages worldwide.
The first edition’s twelve maps left large parts of the
world blank because we lacked accurate knowledge. The thirty
maps featured in the new edition provide global – if still not
comprehensive – coverage. Thus, with this edition, and particularly
with the ever-changing, ever-growing digital version, the Atlas
has become a powerful tool for monitoring the situation of the
world’s endangered languages, while continuing its proven role
as an instrument for raising awareness among policy makers,
the media, the general public and especially the speakers of
languages in danger.
This new edition also features another significant improvement: it reports on a wealth of effective community experiences
in safeguarding and revitalizing endangered languages and a

number of national policy initiatives that support such efforts.
While the threats facing such languages are no smaller or fewer
than they were in 1996 and the urgency of their endangerment
is no less acute, I am encouraged by the increasing effectiveness
of the global response. Let us continue to seek better ways of
supporting the speakers of endangered languages whose strong
commitment to their mother tongue is the most decisive factor
for language maintenance and ensuring sustainable results.

5

This publication has been prepared with the greatest possible care.
However, it may be that a few errors have escaped our attention.
We thank our readers in advance for indicating to us any error or inconsistency,
so that we could improve subsequent editions of this work.

Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
by Irina Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
Christopher Moseley
Cartographic representation
of the world’s endangered languages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
Christopher Moseley

South-East Asia, southern China and Taiwan (China) . . . . . . . . .  64
David Bradley
Greater Pacific area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  74
Darrell T. Tryon
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  79
Michael Walsh
South America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  86
Willem Adelaar

Sub-Saharan Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
Matthias Brenzinger and Herman Batibo

South America: Andean region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  95
Marleen Haboud

North Africa and the Middle East . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
Salem Mezhoud and Yamina El Kirat El Allame
Europe and the Caucasus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
Tapani Salminen
Western and Central Asia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
Hakim Elnazarov
North-east Asia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  48

Mexico and Central America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  103
Yolanda Lastra
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  108
Chris Rogers, Naomi Palosaari and Lyle Campbell
Canada and Greenland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  113
Mary Jane Norris

Juha Janhunen
Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  122
India and the Himalayan chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  59
Stuart Blackburn and Jean Robert Opgenort

Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  125
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  137

Introduction
Christopher Moseley

Nine years have passed since the previous edition of this Atlas was
published. Nine years have also passed since the death of Professor
Stephen Wurm of the Australian National University, who edited the
first two editions. They marked the first attempt to plot on maps the
locations of the languages that were most in danger of extinction within
the foreseeable future. Both those editions highlighted particular areas
of the world where linguistic diversity was being seriously depleted.
This project was born of a concern for the loss of diversity in
this most basic human resource. It parallels the increasing concern
over the loss of the world’s biological diversity, and for related
reasons: the loss of isolated and self-sustaining habitats in the face of
encroaching urbanization, economic concentration and the consequent
homogenization of human cultures.
By its very nature, this Atlas tends to become outdated more
rapidly than an ordinary language atlas would do. What is plotted on
these maps are the most fragile linguistic balances – languages in danger
of disappearing, even disappearing from one edition to the next.
The present edition is a logical progression from the second
edition of 2001, which was divided into five parts: an introduction detailing
developments in the study of endangered languages since the first
edition; a description of the phenomenon of language endangerment
and the death of languages; a short report on efforts by the scientific
community to describe and record endangered languages; a fairly
detailed overview of language endangerment in all major parts of the
world; and a small atlas of some fourteen maps, some completely new
and some others revised from the previous edition.
What the 2001 edition called ‘major parts of the world’ could
be defined as those areas where the pressure on minority languages
was the greatest, to put it in the simplest terms. This edition, however,

Introduction

expands the coverage to virtually the entire inhabited world, regardless

an international one, and one which, at the very least, has sufficient

of the density of endangered languages, while varying the scale of

infrastructure to organize such an expedition. One must also assume that

the maps to accommodate and acknowledge those areas where the

the contacting side has an interest in either the speech community or the

linguistic diversity is greatest, or under the greatest threat.

land it occupies. Commercial expansion and exploitation are frequently

The five years between the appearance of the first two editions

the motive behind such explorations and incursions.

were marked by an explosion in awareness of and research into language

Such first contacts are rare nowadays, but not unknown. There

endangerment. This was due to several factors. My predecessor,

are also cases where the speakers deliberately repulse any attempt

Stephen Wurm, in the Introduction to the previous edition, pointed

at contact, such as the speakers of Sentilese on Sentinel Island in

to a number of ventures that appeared alongside the first edition of

the Andaman group in India, and certain Amazonian groups. In the

this Atlas, including both publications and organizations in support

twenty-first century, when a traditional way of life among hunter-gatherer

of threatened languages. For a number of years previously, several

peoples is a rarity, it is prized and championed by advocacy groups such

international forums had been calling attention to the threat to the

as Survival International.

world’s pool of species diversity, and clearly this created a public mood

From the point of view of the linguistic researcher, this is a

that also encouraged an interest in preserving the diversity of human

double-edged sword. The trained linguist must be sensitive and alert

language and material culture. Thanks to the devotion of linguists

not only to linguistic factors so as to be able to accurately describe and

in many countries, for the first time in human history it had become

transcribe the language (usually with the help of a bilingual intermediary)

possible, at least in theory, to accurately catalogue and locate every

but also to non-linguistic and cultural factors, ignorance of which might

language known all over the world. The compendium the Ethnologue:

alienate the group being studied and make cooperation impossible.

Languages of the World (Lewis, 2009), published by SIL International

Nowadays professional linguists, whether their aims are missionary or

at regular intervals since 1951, is one of the most extensive efforts of

purely research-oriented, receive a thorough training in field methods.

this kind, and the Encyclopedia of the World’s Endangered Languages

This in itself is an important factor in the future preservation of the

(Moseley, 2007) is one of the most recent. The only languages omitted

world’s threatened languages.

were those belonging to the remaining handful of uncontacted peoples
in the most inaccessible regions of the world.

What constitutes an endangered language, then? Linguists differ
in their assessments of what exactly endangerment is, and the degrees

Uncontacted languages are not the same as endangered

of danger implied (see the writings of Joshua Fishman, 1991, 2000, a

languages, of course. But from the moment contact is established with

pioneer in this field of study, on the ways of assessing the viability of a

the outside world, it must be assumed that the (previously) uncontacted

language for revitalization), but the simplest definition that can be given

group is not initiating the contact, but rather has been ‘discovered’, and

is the following: a language is endangered if it is not being passed on to

that the discoverers represent a much larger speech community, probably

younger generations.

9

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

There are many complications, nuances and uncertainties
associated with this definition. For example, a language may be thriving

10

Languages Project, based at the School of Oriental and African Studies
(SOAS), University of London.

in the home environment, but not taught in the schools. In such cases, the

The revival of recently or even long-extinct languages is becoming

language is not likely to be a written one, so that oral transmission is the

a topical issue in many parts of the world, with the descendants of the

norm. A language may be the vehicle of an economic underclass whose

last speakers clamouring for materials on their ancestral languages in

breadwinners are forced to go elsewhere to seek work – and when they

order to gain an insight into how they sounded and functioned, and to

do move into a larger speech community, they may not be able to retain

relearn them at least in part so that they can use words and phrases as

everyday use of their own language. Circumstances vary from region to

symbols of their reawakened identity. In Australia, for example, several

region, as will be seen from the discussions in this book, but a common

dying or extinct languages have been revived and already have several

thread running through those discussions is that endangered languages

dozen speakers, with more and more members of the respective ethnic

lack prestige – even in the eyes of their speakers; they lack economic

communities learning their ancestral tongues.

power and independence; they lack a stable infrastructure; and in most

Nations in which a major world language of colonial expansion

cases they also lack literacy. That is why it is an important mission of

is the dominant one, but which harbour small languages whose territory

the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

is shrinking, have often found it hard to come to terms with their

(UNESCO) to locate and publicize those languages, for the common

indigenous heritage, and have not devoted sufficient attention to the

awareness of humankind and the common good of its Member States.

field of safeguarding language. This is true not only of Australia, Canada

Between the first and second editions of this Atlas, rapid strides

and the United States, where English has swept all before it, but also of

were made in the coordinated study of language endangerment on a

Lusophone Brazil and the Spanish-speaking world generally. That is one

worldwide basis. Work on severely endangered languages in various parts

reason why this international volume fills such a pressing need: there is

of the world was carried out under a contract between the Intangible

an obvious benefit in comparing the situations of loss of diversity and

Cultural Heritage Section of UNESCO and the Permanent International

taking steps to redress the balance.

Committee of Linguists (CIPL), enabled by a series of grants. Grants have

The history of mapping the world’s languages is almost as recent

also been provided for language documentation and rescue projects

as that of the awareness of language endangerment – indeed, they go

by the Linguistic Circle of Copenhagen; the Volkswagen Stiftung in

hand in hand. Not only does this edition of the Atlas provide a more

Germany; the British-based Foundation for Endangered Languages;

complete coverage of the world’s surface than the previous editions, but

the Endangered Languages Fund in the United States of America; and

the maps have been prepared in a completely different way. For the first

the Languages of the Pacific Rim Project directed from Kyoto, Japan.

time, this Atlas is being made available in both print and online versions,

The funding of research in the field has been placed on a much firmer

and the contributors have plotted the data interactively, making use of

footing since the establishment in 2002 of the Hans Rausing Endangered

an interface developed by UNESCO and based on the Google Maps

Introduction

platform. The online edition of the Atlas similarly relies on this widely

languages, where decreasing numbers of children are being taught the

available and familiar platform to present all the data included in the

language; endangered languages, meaning that the youngest speakers

print edition and much more.

are young adults; seriously endangered languages, where the youngest

Some of the maps have been updated from the previous edition;

speakers have already passed middle age; critically endangered

others are entirely new. Likewise, many of the contributors have been

languages, which have only a few elderly speakers remaining; and extinct

involved with the project since its inception, while others (especially

languages, marked in the previous editions with a black cross where

those working on entirely new maps) have been specially commissioned

they were last known to be spoken. Of course, the world is littered with

for this edition. The format of the Atlas remains much the same, however:

extinct languages, and those included here are only those that have

a text covering the general issues of language endangerment in each of

died recently, within the past couple of generations. In practice this

the regions into which the maps are divided, followed by a set of maps

means: since an awareness of their plight and imminent extinction was

on which languages are plotted using a colour-coded system showing

recorded. All trace of these languages has, in some cases, been wiped

the degree of endangerment. The markers are of uniform size: it would

out for ever.

be impossible to clearly represent tiny speech communities within a

Following a two-year period of research by an ad hoc team

vast area inhabited by majority languages. The online version shows,

of linguists commissioned by UNESCO, a document was published

at the click of a mouse on the marker, the exact latitude and longitude

under the title Language Vitality and Endangerment (UNESCO, 2003).

coordinates of a language as well as a wealth of other information, and

It established six degrees of endangerment that ‘may be distinguished

permits interactive contributions from the world’s linguists, census-takers

with regard to intergenerational transmission’:

and, most importantly, language communities.
Since the process of language attrition and extinction is a slow

Safe (5): The language is spoken by all generations. The inter-

one, usually occurring over several generations, the Atlas has had to

generational transmission of the language is uninterrupted.

be somewhat arbitrary in its choice of which languages to exclude. Our

[Thus such languages are not indicated in this Atlas.]

aim is to raise the alarm for languages that are, as the title states, in

Stable yet threatened (5-): The language is spoken in most

danger. We take this mandate to mean all languages that are known

contexts by all generations with unbroken intergenerational

to be in decline towards a foreseeable point of extinction – where

transmission, yet multilingualism in the native language and

the mechanisms are not in place to ensure their transmission to future

one or more dominant language(s) has usurped certain impor-

generations – a decline that is predictable, but not of course inevitable.

tant communication contexts. Note that such multilingualism

The terminology of the degrees of endangerment has changed

alone is not necessarily a threat to languages.

slightly since the first and second editions of this Atlas. Professor Wurm

Vulnerable (4): Most, but not all, children or families of a

had established the practice of naming the five gradations as: vulnerable

particular community speak their parental language as their

11

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

first language, but this may be restricted to specific social

term has caused offence among those who are successfully revitalizing

domains (such as the home, where children interact with their

languages with only a handful of speakers, and even reviving the use of

parents and grandparents).

languages that had once been thought to be beyond saving. This gives

Definitely endangered (3): The language is no longer being

us new hope, and we are pleased to acknowledge that the bald term

learned as the mother tongue by children in the home. The

'extinct' does not reflect the true situation for some languages. These

youngest speakers are thus of the parental generation. At this

are the languages whose use and transmission have been interrupted

stage, parents may still speak their language to their children,

for a generation or more. Previous editions of this Atlas had not had to

but their children do not typically respond in the language.

consider revitalization movements, but since the last edition, in many

Severely endangered (2): The language is spoken only by

places, they have gained strength and second-language speakers. Such

grandparents and older generations; while the parent genera-

languages, which might now be classified as 'critically endangered',

tion may still understand the language, they typically do not

'vulnerable' or some other term within our terminology, will be identified

speak it to their children, or among themselves.

as being in the process of revitalization.

Critically endangered (1): The youngest speakers are in the

Lastly, a word should be added about an all-important factor in

great-grandparental generation, and the language is not used

the transmission of language: literacy. It would have been desirable in this

for everyday interactions. These older people often remember

Atlas to indicate on the maps whether each marked language possesses

only part of the language but do not use it on a regular basis,

a written form. But this is not easy or straightforward. First, the speakers

since there are few people left to speak with.

may possess literacy, but not in their own tongue – rather, in one of

Extinct (0): There is no one who can speak or remember the

greater prestige and a longer written tradition. Second, the ‘written form’

language.

may have been devised by outside linguists for transcription purposes,
rather than for the creation of a body of written work, or a means of

For this edition, these are the definitions that have been adopted, and

ordinary communication, by the speakers. Third, a written tradition in the

we have decided to represent languages in the last five categories:

language may have died out before the spoken form, and it may have

vulnerable, definitely endangered, severely endangered, critically

been unstable and not in general use. With so many variables, it is not

endangered and extinct.

possible to present this information in graphically coded form. Literacy,

It is a sign of the vigour of language revitalization efforts in
various parts of the world that, in the course of preparing this Atlas,
our team has met with objections to the term 'extinct' to refer to

12

languages that have lost their last first-language speakers within living
memory of present generations, according to our objective criteria. Our

however, figures prominently in the discussions by the regional editors in
the different chapters of this volume.

Introduction



Acknowledgements

The team of regional editors and their assistant contributors prepared
this vast project over several months and working to a tight schedule;
inevitably, the work involved constant consultation. The project was
ably managed at UNESCO by my colleagues in the Intangible Cultural
Heritage Section, to whom I as General Editor am indebted for
much wise guidance. The named authors of the regional chapters
have collaborated wonderfully well, and at any time of the day or
night, somewhere in the world, they were working away, teasing out
apparently intractable problems and inconsistencies and keeping me
abreast of their progress.
They in turn have been greatly helped by a number of contributors,
among whom I should particularly like to mention Gustavo Solis Fonseca,
Tulio Rojas Curieux, Denny Moore and Bruna Franchetto, who have
all made significant contributions to our knowledge of the language
situation in South America. In Central America, too, a team of helpers
worked on the project; they are named in the appropriate chapter. Of
the regional editors, Tapani Salminen deserves special praise for his
vigilance in spotting inconsistencies and lacunae between regions, and
in helping to solve methodological and terminological issues. We have
all learned a great deal from each other.

13

Cartographic
representation
of the world’s
endangered
languages
Christopher Moseley

The first edition of this Atlas was coordinated from the Research School
of Pacific Studies at the Australian National University, Canberra, by
the late Professor S. A. Wurm. The school was in a unique position to
record the location of languages graphically, as it had its own wellequipped cartographic department. Since then, however, there have
been significant developments in the field of cartography as well as in
the amount of linguistic data available. This third edition has adopted
some essentially different methods of presenting a snapshot of the
current state of language endangerment worldwide.
The editorial team has given a great deal of thought as to
whether the location of languages should be shown by means of
polygons (or areas delimited by borders), accurately corresponding
in scale to the territory occupied by the language, or, as in the
previous editions, by single (or in some cases multiple) points. For
both the online and the printed versions of this edition, we decided
in the end to retain single points of a standard size. There are several
reasons for this: first, many languages in danger of disappearing
are characteristically spoken over a very restricted territory, often
a steadily diminishing one. Second, the shape of a polygon would
imply that surrounding language(s) also occupy a distinctly shaped
territory, which, however, has been omitted from these maps. Third,
this in turn implies a discrete monolingualism, which is unlikely to be
the case. Speakers of endangered languages are usually forced by
circumstances to become fluent in one or more majority languages,
for communication with larger out-groups. Fourth, and consequently,
this would require an overlap between the polygons to indicate
multilingualism, which would detract from the impact of the single
points, in many cases clustered together in complex areas of multiple
endangerment.

Cartographic representation of the world’s endangered languages

In its first edition, the Atlas was closely bound up with the Red Book

Independently of this, the science of cartography was making

of Languages in Danger of Disappearing (UNESCO, 1993), and took its

great advances. The distribution of human languages is of course

name from that book. Among the stated aims of the project were: (a) the

intimately bound up with topography, climate, soil conditions and a host

continuation of the gathering of information as to which languages are to

of other factors that allow human settlement, and it has now become

be considered endangered, their status and the degree of urgency of their

possible to set the distribution of languages against a topographic

study, for transmission to the Clearing House for Scientific Information in

background that displays the conditions for human settlement, and

Tokyo; (b) the collection of materials in endangered languages that had

population density. Humankind is infinitely adaptable, but obviously the

hitherto been little studied, especially those of interest for typology; and (c)

most densely populated areas are those with a ready fertile access to

the preservation and protection of languages. These and other aims were

food, and the most sparsely populated, as a rule, those with the harshest

to be served by the publication of this Atlas. There was no stated intention

climate and most arid soil.

to cover the entire globe, but rather to highlight areas of particularly acute

As with the two previous editions of this volume, a team of

language endangerment. The widespread nature of the problem was

expert linguists from around the world was assembled to enter the

illustrated by taking sample areas from every continent. However, as we

latest available data on the languages of the regions into which the

came to prepare this third edition, the need for a far more comprehensive

maps are divided. They used a new method, however. Overseen by

coverage was obvious. Languages are under threat on every continent, and

UNESCO’s Web Editor for the project, they were able to enter the data

UNESCO sees the need to treat the problem as a universal one.

in both the online and printed editions of this Atlas directly onto maps

Linguistic geography, if we may call it that, is a young discipline

provided by the Google Earth system. These maps have the advantage

and not yet a recognized branch of science. Language mapping for

over the previous editions of giving a clear and accurate picture of the

most of the past century has concerned itself with single countries,

topography of the region depicted. Further, in the online edition it is

with particular linguistic phenomena such as dialect distribution and

possible to ‘zoom in’ on any particular area of linguistic interest with a

isoglosses. Language maps embracing whole continents and regions

great deal of variability.

emerged in the last two decades of the twentieth century, but it was not

Given the much greater degree of accuracy in geographical

until the Atlas of the World’s Languages (Moseley and Asher, 1994) was

representation, the team of linguists faced several new challenges.

published that a truly global coverage became possible. The cataloguing

A high level of accuracy was asked of them when pinpointing the

of the world’s languages was pioneered by the Summer Institute of

location of a language with a standard-sized point, and of course the

Linguistics (now, SIL International) in their regularly revised volume,

distribution of a language is in many cases not adequately shown by a

the Ethnologue: Languages of the World (Lewis, 2009); in its printed

single point. Therefore we often deemed it necessary to use multiple

and online versions this does indeed include maps, but the maps are

points to indicate the spread of a language. An endangered language

subsidiary to the textual identification and description of language.

might indeed be confined to just one village in some places, but in

15

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

16

others, among nomadic peoples, say, in sparsely populated regions,

argument against the use of polygons on our maps.) And where different

their territory may cover a vast area. So we readily admit that a single

varieties of the same language are pinpointed separately, we have tried

point is only a rough approximation. On the other hand, experience has

as far as possible to distinguish them with appropriate and recognizable

taught us that varying the size of the points according to population or

designations.

territorial size would ‘crowd out’ other minority languages in multilingual

For each threatened language we have attempted to provide

areas to the detriment of the smaller ones, making the maps less legible.

some basic data for the user (more detailed, of course, in the online

A mere glance at the overall world map, with its myriad of pinpoints, will

edition): geographical coordinates of latitude and longitude; the name in

prove this.

most common use; alternate names (where necessary, in alternate scripts);

What is more informative, we decided, is to retain the system

the number of speakers and the date of the census when this was last

of single points, colour-coded for their degree of endangerment. If the

ascertained; a textual description of the location; and the ISO-639 code.

data on the maps are sometimes difficult to interpret, the accompanying

This internationally recognized method of identifying languages by a

text should provide clarification. Sparsely populated regions, such as

unique three-letter standard code, created by the International Standards

Alaska, contain numerous languages which have few speakers, and those

Organization (ISO), was applied by the publishers of the Ethnologue, SIL.

speakers may be widely spread; in such cases, the points have been

The coding is necessary because several widely disparate languages may

deployed to give an indication of the extent of the language. To pretend

bear the same name or confusingly similar names. What, for instance, is

to greater accuracy than this, where so few speakers are involved, would

meant by the language name ‘Tonga’? Is it a Bantu language of Malawi,

soon make our mapping out of date.

Zambia and Zimbabwe, a minority language in Thailand or the national

Endangered languages are no respecters of national boundaries,

language of the island state of Tonga? It is all of these, and separate

and there are numerous instances in this Atlas of languages that straddle

codes allocated to these languages obviate the confusion. Sources of

borders. On either side of a national border, the same language may be

information are also given as fully as possible. This Atlas aims to provide

faring differently, due to economic circumstances, or national language

an accurate record of the state of humanity’s fragile resource, language,

policies, or other factors. A good example of this in Europe is the

in its most precarious situations, as of the year 2009. It is a constantly

Basque language, which crosses the border of France and Spain, but is

changing situation and our methods are geared towards keeping it

in a different state of health on either side, and is marked as such. There

under constant review in the coming years.

are of course languages that are healthy and robust in some places

Our contributors have not used the ISO-639 codes unquestioningly,

(and thus not shown there) but languishing elsewhere. Our editors for

however. In many cases we found that the same code is given to two

highland and lowland South America have, for instance, been diligent

languages that we know to be distinct; on the other hand, two codes may

in trying to map the true situation of the Quechua/Quichua continuum,

have been assigned in the past to what prove, with better knowledge,

which traverses several national boundaries. (This fact is yet another

to be one and the same language. We have made use of the coding to

Cartographic representation of the world’s endangered languages

the best of our ability, but we hope that our findings will help to correct

to distinguish where Mapudungu (Mapuche) ends from areas

some misdesignations.

with no speakers of anything (or of only Spanish)? In northern

Where the distribution of threatened minority languages is

Argentina, how can we show where Wichí ends (that is, the

relatively dense (in West Africa or the Himalayas, for example), the

extent of its territory) and where Spanish is the only language?

topography (mountains and valleys, difficult terrain) also lends itself

In North America, how do we show that Navajo covers a large

to the presence of discrete speech communities and therefore their

geographical area, but Hopi only a small one?

representation by single points may be unambiguous and uncontroversial.
But this may also mean that the language, though spoken by few

These very valid concerns required a considered response. Apart from

people, is stable and secure, and does not earn a place in the Atlas.

the problem of representing multilingualism within an area presented

Where the speech community is spread over a wide area, unimpeded

as ostensibly monolingual, there is the additional issue of the notion of

by topographical obstacles, however, such as in Siberia, much of North

ancestral territory. In certain parts of the world, notably North America

America and the southern part of South America, the representation by

but also Australia and elsewhere, populations have been moved from

this system is problematic, and we must frankly admit that our mapping

their traditional lands to reservations, usually with clearly defined

method is a compromise. By their nature, endangered languages

boundaries. To merely indicate these boundaries, or alternatively

tend to have small populations, and these populations are likely to be

to show the ancestral lands, would ultimately be a disservice to the

multilingual – speaking the majority regional or national language, and

speakers, as it would not show their true current situation. It might give

very often other adjacent minority languages as well. Multilingualism is a

the reader a false picture of the health and vigour of fast-dwindling

factor we cannot show on a map with our method, though it is discussed

languages.

at various points in the accompanying text. We are all well aware of the

For these and other practical reasons, we decided to retain the

problem and the need for compromise. To highlight the issue, I shall

‘point’ system used in the previous editions, but to greatly increase

quote a question put by one of our regional editors to the designer of

the number of languages covered and to carefully monitor and,

the input system:

where necessary, revise the indication of the level of endangerment.
We acknowledge the shortcomings of this selective mapping, but our

A single point for a language spoken in a single village would

overriding aim has been to highlight the presence of the world’s most

be fine, but a single point or a few points for a language

threatened languages, irrespective of the area they cover. As an extreme

spoken across many thousands of square kilometres would

example of scattered versus concentrated speech communities, we

make that language appear to be very poorly represented:

might cite Tundra Nenets and Tundra Enets in Siberia: the former is

for example, Yup’ik Eskimo, Inuit, Cree, varieties of Quechua,

found sparsely settled over several thousand square kilometres; the

Arabic, etc. In Argentina, for example, how will you be able

latter is now confined to one village.

17

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

What the reader will not find on these maps are pidgin and trade

It might be argued that we have neglected to indicate in these

languages. These ‘languages of wider intercultural communication’,

maps a very important factor in language maintenance, namely literacy,

as they are sometimes called, come into being and fade away over

as mentioned in the Introduction to this edition. The presence of a

time as the need for them as a bridge between mutually unintelligible

written form of an indigenous language will usually contribute to its

languages rises and falls. They are by nature second languages for their

preservation, enhance its prestige relative to other languages, make the

speakers, and so the question of ‘number of first-language speakers’

language transmissible to unseen generations and locations, and thus

does not arise. Apart from the extreme difficulty of mapping such

ensure its future. Unfortunately the issue is not clear-cut, and although

naturally mobile languages by means of fixed points, the data on

we might have devised a method for indicating literacy among the

their use are extremely fluid, and we have thus consciously omitted

speaker populations in our symbol-and-colour coding system, too often,

them. Furthermore, the Atlas aims at emphasizing diversity rather than

in the available data, mother-tongue literacy and second- or majority-

homogeneity, in parallel with the avowed UNESCO aim of recording

language literacy are confused. Some endangered languages, such as

the world’s biodiversity, and drawing a direct parallel between the

Sorbian in Germany, do have a literary standard (in this case, two distinct

conservation of diversity in nature and that in human culture. Pidgins

standards) and a high degree of mother-tongue literacy, but this has not

and trade languages are an interesting and important phenomenon,

prevented its endangerment. Perhaps it has delayed its extinction.

however, and are discussed where appropriate in the text.
Creoles (mixed languages that have become first languages) are

chapters, but in ethnically diverse countries with low incomes and low

a different matter, and where they are endangered, we have tried to

educational opportunities among the endangered speaker communities,

record them. In many parts of the world, however, the development of a

education through a wider medium than the mother tongue is the norm

creole implies the extinction and replacement of one or more indigenous

rather than the exception. This situation is not likely to change within a

languages by one with a wider speaker base (but not always: they may

generation despite the advocacy of UNESCO and many educators and

also arise from the mixing of different immigrant populations).

governments. It is hoped, however, that the Atlas will contribute to an

Nor have we dealt with the issue of sign languages, with one
notable exception in sub-Saharan Africa. Sign languages for the deaf

18

This issue is discussed at greater length in the individual regional

awareness of the problem of mother-tongue illiteracy so that it can be
better monitored in future editions.

are indeed highly diverse, and cogent arguments can be made for their

The distinction between language and dialect is an intractable

endangerment, but they are typically used over wider areas than most

question and we will not pretend that there are any easy answers.

endangered spoken languages, and their attrition can be attributed to

Our regional editors have been faced with numerous questions and

non-linguistic factors including technical innovations such as cochlear

decisions around this issue. Within a generally robust and widespread

implants.

language with a written standard, such as Arabic, for example, should
the Atlas include varieties that are universally regarded as dialects but

Cartographic representation of the world’s endangered languages

are undergoing attrition? Is a ‘language’ that crosses national boundaries

was a rapid learning curve for the contributing regional editors and their

a ‘dialect’ on the other side of the border from where you are standing?

assistants, and I should like to record my sincere thanks to them all for

Objective criteria can be applied, of course – common vocabulary,

their patience and forbearance and willingness to cooperate in meeting

mutual intelligibility, grammatical and morphological analyses, measured

a tight publication schedule.

in percentages – but in too many instances, not enough is known or

This is an ongoing project, and there can be no definitive final

agreed, so inevitably our concept of ‘language’ and ‘dialect’ remains

edition as long as human beings are speaking animals. Readers are

elastic, and our regional editors have used their discretion. Speakers of

invited to point out any errors of fact or omissions so that they can be

dialects will tend to write in the literary standard, as they were taught at

rectified in future editions.

school, however much their own speech may depart from its norms, and
to take this standard as a benchmark for the ‘correct’ language.
Yet another cartographic problem arises with non-territorial
‘diaspora’ languages. These are languages of international distribution
that have proved impossible to map accurately or comprehensively, such
as Romani and Yiddish. Although it would be possible to map some of
the locations of these languages, they would not tell the full story and
would be mere tokens. There are also some, such as Plautdietsch and
Ladino, which have migrated far from their original homelands but still
occupy discrete and identifiable settlements that can be mapped. (These
languages are discussed in the relevant chapters below.)
The regional editors of this volume have tried wherever possible
to use the latest and most authoritative available data on census figures,
language classification and locations. While Member States of UNESCO
are all referred to on the maps by their official names, the data presented
have not relied on the sanction of those governments, but are the
responsibility of the editors and their contributors. Sources are cited as
comprehensively as possible for all the data.
This third edition of the Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger
is a new and pioneering work in many respects, but most particularly
in terms of cartography. Preparation of the maps for the online version

19

Sub-Saharan
Africa
Matthias Brenzinger and Herman Batibo

Sub-Saharan Africa includes about one-third of the world’s languages.
Today, Africans still communicate in over 2,000 languages that
represent a significant part of the world’s language diversity and
display great typological variation.
Up to 10 per cent of the African languages – especially those
spoken by small speech communities – may disappear within the next
hundred years. Most of them are among the 2,500 or so languages
included in this Atlas. Over 100 other languages exist only by name,
which is why they have been omitted from our endangered language
overview.
In addition to those small speech communities scattered
over the continent, there are high-risk areas for languages and their
speakers. The most widespread threat to African language diversity,
however, has still not been documented adequately by scholars and
has also been left out of this survey: the slow drift of hundreds of
languages whenever genetically related languages are in contact.
Batibo (2005), for example, describes Zaramo as slowly giving way to
Swahili in spite of its ethnic population of over 200,000 people. Not
even the speakers themselves are aware of the loss of their languages,
and African languages still generally considered to be spoken by
100,000 people might in fact have almost disappeared.
In contrast, quite a number of major African languages are vital
and are even gaining speakers: some by being acquired as additional
languages, others by spreading at the expense of African vernaculars.
In general, English and French – the ex-colonial languages for most
of the continent – are not displacing African languages, at least not
at this point in time. It is African languages that are replacing other
African languages.

Sub-Saharan Africa

The African language market

lingua franca spoken by everybody and even a mother tongue for many

The continental language market consists of more than 2,000 ethnic

for several reasons, including the still prevailing subsistence economy,

languages, i.e. vernaculars spoken as first languages by African speech

but also because of widespread poverty and the marginalization of rural

communities. The approximately 100 international, national, regional and

communities. The job market is still very limited and people usually

local lingua francas, i.e. media of wider or inter-ethnic communication,

make their living within their communities. Community structures in

are generally acquired as additional languages and some of them are

pressurized social units generally demand that their members conform

spoken by several million people.

to social norms, with proficiency in the heritage language being a basic

The mother tongues of Africans are generally African languages,

children in cities. The large number of African vernaculars have survived

requirement.

if we consider Afrikaans and the various creoles among them. Languages

African societies and individuals are commonly multilingual; many

that are employed as lingua francas are either African vernaculars that

people use more than four or five languages in their daily lives. The

have expanded beyond their ethnic groups, such as Hausa (West Africa),

multilingual arrangements in which different languages are assigned

Wolof (Senegal) and Amharic (Ethiopia), or pidgins and creoles. The

to specific domains and functions are still fairly stable. From their

latter are of two basic types, namely those based on African languages,

individual language repertoires, speakers may pick different languages

such as Lingala (mainly Democratic Republic of the Congo and Congo)

for communicating at home, at the market, at school, at church or in the

and Kituba (Democratic Republic of the Congo), and those based on

mosque.

European languages, such as Krio (Sierra Leone) and Nigerian Pidgin
English (Nigeria), as well as the different variants of French (Côte d’Ivoire,
Cameroon, etc.). Many of these pidgin languages are not only gaining
speakers through urbanization and other forms of modern mobility, but
increasingly receiving recognition. In Nigeria, Nigerian Pidgin English

The contexts of language
displacement

has developed into a creole and is replacing other African languages as

In sub-Saharan Africa, not only languages but often the speakers

a new mother tongue. Pidgins and creoles are the youngest and fastest-

themselves are threatened by external forces such as military, economic,

growing languages on the continent and will play important roles as

religious, cultural or educational pressures. Some of these external

replacing languages.

pressures develop into internal forces, such as a community’s negative

If, in the 1960s, European languages were commonly acquired in

attitude towards its own language, or into a general decline of group

sub-Saharan Africa as additional languages, mainly by members of the

identity. Together, these forces jeopardize the intergenerational

elites, this is no longer the general rule today. In countries with a strong

transmission of linguistic and cultural traditions. Poverty and

urbanization rate, like Gabon in Central Africa, French has become a

marginalization are often associated with ethnolinguistic minorities and

21

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

22

their languages. For that reason, parents in these communities often

are used in administration and politics, science and education, as well

decide to bring up their children in other languages than their own.

as literature and the media. After independence, the governments

By doing so, they hope to overcome discrimination, attain equality of

of sub-Saharan African countries generally declared the ex-colonial

opportunity and derive economic benefits for themselves and their

languages, namely English, French and Portuguese, as the official

children.

state languages. This policy is still in force today, with governments

The scenarios in which African languages are at present being

arguing that these foreign languages are non-ethnic and allow access

replaced range from subnational to national and regional contexts, and

to the world. By using them, African governments have tried to put

finally to environments that are formed by processes associated with

into practice the nineteenth-century European ideology of ‘one nation

globalization. To understand the dynamics of language displacement,

– one people – one language’. In the same context of national states,

it is necessary to consider the specific contexts in which language

however, we also find African languages that are established as ‘official

shifts occur.

languages’ or at least as officially recognized ‘national languages’. In

In a regional or international context, African languages of wider

such settings, where national loyalty is associated with speaking the

communication have spread as languages of trade, work, the army or

national tongue, ethnolinguistic minorities are frequently unable to

religion, or along with rapid urbanization. In West Africa, change in

resist these outside pressures.

religious affiliation, for example, has resulted in shifts to new mother

Swahili in the United Republic of Tanzania, Setswana in Botswana,

tongues, languages that are associated with a new religion: Hausa in

Sango in the Central African Republic, Wolof in Senegal and Bambara

Nigeria and neighbouring countries; and, further west, Dyula, which

in Mali, to list but a few, are among the few African languages that

spread along with Islam on a wider regional scale. Economically

have developed into media of nationwide communication. Swahili and

disadvantaged communities seem to be better off as part of a wider,

Setswana, in particular, have been described as threats to all other

Hausa- or Dyula-speaking Muslim society. In East Africa, Swahili is

languages of the respective national states. Thus, Swahili threatens more

another language that has long been associated with Islam. It is evident

than 130 Tanzanian languages, while Setswana does the same to about 30

from many of its expressions that the language is one of the agents of

languages spoken in Botswana. The pressure from these two languages

the spread of the faith. Islamized communities in East Africa often shift to

is subtle, however, and the effects on language endangerment are

Swahili and abandon their ethnic languages. As a result of an improved

difficult to ascertain. The replacement of languages in these contexts is

infrastructure that allows for greater mobility, Bambara in West Africa,

more of a drift than a language shift. It will probably not even be noticed

Lingala in Central Africa and many other regional languages seem to

until it is too late. Very few languages are considered endangered in

expand and grow stronger by the day.

the United Republic of Tanzania, although it could be argued that a

On the level of national states, governments obviously rely on the
languages in which they run their countries. National majority languages

vast number in the coastal hinterland are already losing their younger
speakers to Swahili.

Sub-Saharan Africa

Sudan is not only the largest, but also one of the linguistically

hunter-gatherer communities, such as the Yaaku, Aasax and Akie, have

most diverse countries on the African continent. Well over 100 languages

abandoned their heritage languages and adopted the Maa language

are spoken, in addition to which, Arabic has been used as a lingua

along with the pastoral way of life. The younger generations of these

franca in many parts of the country during the past two centuries. Since

former hunter-gatherers are pastoralists and now share the prejudice

independence, the national policy has aimed at ‘Sudanization’, implying

towards ‘poor people without cattle’, in other words, they look down on

a reduction of ethnic and linguistic multiplicity. Today, a great number

their own ancestors, and sometimes even their elders.

of speech communities are dispersed, many to urban areas. The younger

Each language shift has its own unique setting, history and

members no longer speak their heritage languages, but Arabic instead.

dynamics. According to Cronk (2004), bride-wealth inflation, for example,

Although a more liberal policy was officially declared in 2004, there have

has led the once-foraging Yaaku to change first their subsistence

been few real changes in regard to the policy of ‘Sudanization’.1

patterns, and finally their ethnic and linguistic identity. When Yaaku

Most African minority languages are still threatened in subnational

girls began marrying neighbouring pastoralists, the parents received

contexts, and language displacement in sub-Saharan Africa occurs

livestock as bride-wealth, not only beehives as had been the Yaaku

mostly in these contexts. Such language shift takes place in local contact

custom. This made it necessary for young Yaaku men to acquire cattle,

situations and for quite different reasons, some of which are mentioned

too, since Yaaku fathers demanded cattle as bride-wealth from then on.

briefly below.

Hunter-gatherers were considered poor, and in order to found families,
young Yaaku men had to become pastoralists and adopt the Maa

African languages replace
African languages
On a subnational or local level, language shifts in Africa seem to occur

language. Other examples can be mentioned, for instance, in Gabon,
where hunter-gatherer communities such as the Babongo have switched
to the languages of their neighbours (Masango, Tsogo, Simba, etc.),
the Bakoya to Ungom, the Makina (Shiwa) to Fang, and the Sekiani to
Mpongwe.

simultaneously with shifts to value systems of other African communities.

In similar contexts, small communities are currently taking over

Over the past decades, several hunter-gatherer communities have

the languages of their immediate neighbours, languages that are often

assimilated and taken on the languages of pastoral societies. In these

themselves spoken only by small speech communities. In southern

societies, the possession of livestock is of primary importance and

Ethiopia, ‘Ongota (Birale) is being replaced by Ts’amakko (Ts’amay),

hunter-gatherers are looked down upon as people without cattle. Former

Kwegu (Koegu) by Mursi, Shabo by Majang and Harro by Bayso.
Language is the main indicator for group identity, and the ‘Ongota

1.

More information on the linguistic situation in Sudan is included in the
chapter on North Africa and the Middle East.

people today survive as Ts’amay; of course, in order to become Ts’amay
they need to speak Ts’amakko.

23

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Other subnational contexts in which languages disappear locally

languages in national administration, in secondary and higher education,

are triggered by drastic changes in the physical environment. The East

and in modern literature. However, some of the stongest threats to

African Rift Valley runs all the way from Ethiopia to South Africa and

African linguistic diversity are probably due to other factors.

has many lakes on its valley bottom. Several distinct languages have
exclusively been spoken on islands found in some of these lakes, but
it seems that they might soon disappear. The introduction of new fish
species for commercial production has resulted in a dramatic decrease
of tilapia and other indigenous fish species in the lakes; the latter used
to make up the main catch in the subsistence fishing of the islanders.

This Atlas provides an overview of endangered and recently vanished

Zay people in Lake Zway, Bayso and Harro in Lake Abaya of Ethiopia,

languages. The maps of sub-Saharan Africa show a high concentration

and Elmolo in Lake Turkana of Kenya left their islands because fishing

of endangered languages north of and along the Equator, more or less

no longer provided a living. In their new environments, the children of

in the geographical centre of the continent. This high occurrence of

these communities are growing up together with dominant neighbours.

endangered languages is mainly due to the fact that it is here that the

Language shift has already led to the extinction of their language in

greatest number of African languages are spoken.

the case of Elmolo, and serious threats to language transmission have

Threats to linguistic diversity, however, are by no means restricted

been described for Zay and Harro. Bayso is still spoken, but no longer

to the number of threatened languages, as their genetic status is

by all children, and this small speech community will have to deal with

obviously of crucial importance. The extinction of languages belonging

increased pressure in the future.

to small language families and the disappearance of linguistic isolates

The correlation between language and religious affiliation

have a serious impact on overall linguistic diversity.

involving regional languages has already been mentioned, but there

In 1963 Joseph Greenberg classified the African languages into

are also local settings in which this factor leads to the abandonment of

four major phyla – Niger-Congo, Afro-Asiatic, Nilo-Saharan and Khoisan –

languages. The Jeri leatherworkers live among the Sienare Senufo in

by claiming a genetic relationship for all members belonging to one of

the northern part of Côte d’Ivoire. The community has abandoned its

these ‘super families’ (Greenberg, 1963). Although most scholars still use

own language, and Kastenholz (1998) found that the Jeri have adopted

these four units, the validity of the genetic claim has been challenged.

two different languages as their new mother tongues according to their

Genetic groupings, which may rightly be referred to as families, have

religious affiliation: Sienare by the non-Muslims, and Manding by the

more recently been broken down into much smaller units.

Muslim Jeri.

24

Threats to linguistic
diversity in Africa

The entire Khoisan phylum, today commonly used as an areal-

As already mentioned, African governments continue to use

typological unit, must be considered endangered, as most Khoisan

the languages of the ex-colonial powers. These are still the prevailing

languages are now spoken only by small and marginalized former

Sub-Saharan Africa

hunter-gatherer communities. Their living conditions no longer allow

to maintain and perpetuate Africa’s linguistic diversity, the speakers

them sustenance in their traditional ways of life. Thus, acculturation and

of these languages must find valid economic and cultural reasons for

language shift are widespread among most of the speech communities.

keeping their ancestral languages as vital media in natural everyday

Other endangered language families are the Kordofanian

communication with their offspring.

languages in Sudan and the Kuliak languages in Uganda, as all member
languages are spoken by small communities, who live in quite hostile



environments.

African sign languages are still rarely documented, and the following

Endangered African sign languages

Among the endangered or extinct languages that are considered

information derives mainly from the works of Nyst (2007) and Kamei (2006).

unclassified linguistic isolates, a large number are known only by name,

Local African sign languages have developed in urban as well as rural

and for that reason have not been included in our overview. Studies

settings, and with very few exceptions, such as Hausa Sign Language in

are available for ‘Ongota and Shabo in southern Ethiopia, Hadza in the

northern Nigeria, they are severely threatened. Formal deaf education is

United Republic of Tanzania, Laal in Chad, and Kwadi in Angola; the last

conducted in national sign languages that are based on foreign, imported

of these, however, became extinct over fifty years ago.

sign languages, mostly American Sign Language (ASL). Just as with spoken
languages, these national sign languages are spreading at the expense of

The outlook

local African versions. Especially with the introduction of boarding schools,

In sub-Saharan Africa, languages of ethnolinguistic minorities have

together from all parts of the country, deaf education in national sign

survived in large numbers because of continued marginalization of their

languages puts heavy pressure on local sign languages.

in which children no longer live within their own communities but come

speakers. But what has saved them until now is about to turn against

Some African sign languages were established in urban settings:

them. Nettle and Romaine (2000) consider lack of access to economic

examples are Mbour Sign Language in the town of Mbour in Senegal,

resources to be the fundamental determinant of language shift and

Mali Sign Language in Bamako and Hausa Sign Language in the town of

language death in modern times.

Kano in northern Nigeria. Others developed in rural settings where a high

Even rural communities in remote areas of Africa no longer exist

incidence of deafness made signing the natural form of communication,

in isolation, and probably very few did so in the past. Poverty is not only

even with hearing members of the community, such as in south-east

a growing threat to languages spoken by ethnolinguistic minorities, but

Ghana with Adamorobe Sign Language. Finally, there are local African

may become the prime criterion for abandoning one’s own language. If

sign languages used by small communities or extended families, such

a community’s own languages are not made economically and socially

as Nanabin Sign Language in Ghana, Bura Sign Language in northern

valuable, it will abandon them as soon as it has the opportunity to

Nigeria and Tebul Ure Sign Language in the Dogon region of Mali; the

make progress in modern economic and socio-political life. In order

last two have been briefly documented by Blench and Nyst (2003).

25

North Africa
and the
Middle East
Salem Mezhoud and Yamina El Kirat El Allame

The grouping of the languages of North Africa and the Middle East in
a common zone may at first seem paradoxical, except insofar as Arabic
has been used as the means of intercultural communication among
the otherwise disparate populations of this vast area. It is more of a
geopolitical or religio-political region than a homogeneous linguistic one.
If only for practical reasons, and for a better understanding of the linguistic
situation, a more relevant methodology for analysing endangerment in this
area might be to group the languages of North Africa with those of the
Sahel subregion of West Africa. Not only are the endangered languages
more closely related as the African component of the Afro-Asiatic family
(as opposed to the Semitic family) but many of the languages spoken in
the Sahel belong to the Tamazight (Berber) group.

Data collection


North Africa

No North African state has ever organized sociolinguistic studies or
included the geographical distribution of languages in a population
census, and attempts to gather language statistics are often discouraged.
Nor did the colonial administrations ever concern themselves with
linguistic details even at the height of the policy of ‘divide and rule’.
The only available statistics were estimates by linguists who, with rare
exceptions, were neither equipped with solid census tools nor backed
by official authority and bureaucratic assistance. These rough estimates
continue to serve as the basis for all claims about language distribution
in North Africa.
Historically, the Berber language was spoken in an uninterrupted
chain from Egypt to the Canary Islands. As a result of geographical

North Africa and the Middle East

and political-administrative divisions, it has progressively given birth to

tended to distinguish between ‘Berbers’ and ‘Kabyles’, the latter being

numerous dialects with varying degrees of mutual intelligibility. The word

the better known of all the Berber groups. This contributed to a serious

Berber is an exonym, applied by others. The endonym is Tamazight, which

underestimate of the number of Tamazight-speakers. The subsequent

until recently was only used by and applied to a few communities, most

discovery of the large numbers of Berbers in Morocco, when the kingdom

notably in the Middle Atlas in Morocco. It is also used in different forms

became a French protectorate, merely added to the confusion.

(Tamaheq, Tamajeq, Tamasheq) in the Algerian Sahara and in Niger and

The handful of rigorous scholars such as Andre Basset (see

Mali. Since the 1960s, the name Tamazight has been increasingly used

Basset, 1952) who would later try to obtain a true picture of the linguistic

to supplant Berber both among linguists and among the populations of

situation could neither escape this legacy nor obtain the means to cover

North Africa. The masculine form Amazigh is used mostly as an adjective

such a vast territory. Today, though there is no real consensus, it is

(for example, the Amazigh people speak Tamazight).

widely believed that Tamazight-speakers constitute between 60 per cent

Tamazight, like most of the languages in the region, is commonly

and 80 per cent of the Moroccan population and may well constitute

considered a member of the Afro-Asiatic family. Before the coining of

between 45 per cent and 55 per cent of the Algerian population. Hard

the term ‘Afro-Asiatic’ by Joseph Greenberg (see Greenberg, 1963),

though it is to prove in the absence of a real census, this claim has no

the misleading term ‘Hamito-Semitic’ and the erroneous designation

less validity than the more familiar figure of between 17 per cent and

‘Hamites’ were sometimes applied to the Berber language and people.

20 per cent. One important factor in support of the higher numbers

While the Semitic languages are a linguistically well-established group,

is the fact that large urban centres with substantial proportions of

the other components of the Afro-Asiatic family do not form a subfamily

Tamazight-speakers such as Algiers, Casablanca and Constantine are

and the links between them are more tenuous.

usually not taken into account because their populations are bilingual

The most common estimates of current speakers of Tamazight

(contrary to largely monolingual Agadir, Tizi Ouzou and Bejaia).

put the number at about 40 per cent of the total population in Morocco,

While making substantial use of existing published material from

17 per cent in Algeria, 1 per cent in Tunisia, 5 per cent in the Libyan Arab

previous and more recent generations, this Atlas has also relied on a

Jamahiriya and a fraction in Mauritania. Rather than being based on any

number of unpublished sources, local contacts, research by the authors

new attempts to collect valid information, however, the various claims are

and a growing number of internet-based sources. The profusion of

merely new interpretations of old material. Even where data are obtained

Tamazight societies and associations, both in North Africa and among

from professionals, they suffer from the absence of real investigations.

immigrant communities in Europe and North America, has also provided

A quick review of the colonial literature (Mezhoud, 1996) for Algeria

opportunities to collect and corroborate information. It must be stressed,

showed figures adding up to about 60 per cent of Berber-speakers at the

nevertheless, that although a great deal of effort has gone towards

end of the nineteenth century. It became clear that the sometimes newly

increasing the degree of accuracy of the data, the figures provided are

arrived metropolitan bureaucrats, with very limited local knowledge,

only estimates.

27

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger



The Middle East

policy. First, the only ‘national’ or official language permitted – classical

Much of the data relating to the Middle East is now provided by

or standard Arabic – was introduced from the Middle East, although it

organizations in the diaspora and a handful of international scholars

had hardly been in use in North Africa since the sixteenth century and

and activists. Because of the volatile situation in many countries of the

bears little resemblance to the varieties of Arabic spoken there. Second,

region, much of the published material is out of date, sometimes as

Tamazight-speakers were discouraged from using their own language

soon as it leaves the printing press. Diaspora organizations have been

and government policies were adopted that accelerated its decline. In

able to supply more up-to-date information and provide contacts with

Mauritania, Pulaar, Soninke and Wolof experienced a similar fate.

representatives of communities with first-hand or recent knowledge

Tamazight was not taught at school or university and had limited

of language endangerment. While the existing data are often fairly

or no access to the media. When local radio stations carried programmes

accurate, the rapidly changing situation means that they have constantly

in the Amazigh languages, their broadcasts were gradually decreased

to be re-evaluated.

and sometimes the power and reach of the transmitters were reduced.
Organizers of local concerts were obliged to include Arabic-language

Background to the linguistic situation
in North Africa
With the arrival of Islam, Arabic gained a foothold in North Africa, albeit

acts in their programmes and conferences touching on Tamazight
culture were prohibited. It was the cancellation of one such conference
in Algeria on ancient Tamazight poetry by the scholar and novelist
Mouloud Mammeri that triggered the uprising of April 1980 that became
known as the Amazigh (or Berber) Spring.

within limited confines. Arabic became the language of scholarship

The Amazigh Spring launched a movement for the revitalization

and religion in much the same way that Latin did in Europe. With the

of Tamazight culture that spread first to Morocco and then to virtually

withdrawal of the Muslims from Spain in 1492, North Africa experienced

every country in the region, including Niger and Mali. As a result,

a relative cultural decline. Classical Arabic fell into disuse, while colloquial

reforms have been introduced in recent years, contributing to a lasting

Arabic began to spread throughout the region to the detriment of

solution to the problem of the endangerment of Tamazight.

Tamazight. With the growth of urban centres during the colonial era, this
movement continued.
Although the overwhelming majority of the population of North

28

  	Endangerment and revitalization
of Tamazight

Africa is of Tamazight origin, all the countries of the region, on achieving

There is a recognized linguistic unity between all the languages of the

independence, chose to define themselves officially as Arab states. A

Amazigh sphere (Chaker, 1995). The dominance and/or prestige of

sizeable proportion of the population, particularly in Algeria, Morocco

other languages (French, Arabic) have for a long time isolated many

and the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, felt doubly disenfranchised by this

communities from each other and resulted in the development of specific

North Africa and the Middle East

phonological features and, in some cases, slight syntactic differences.
Most of the varieties are mutually intelligible.

Despite the limited resources, it is thought that some of the
larger Tamazight groups, in particular Taqbaylit (Kabyle), are no longer

Most of the endangered languages of North Africa discussed

endangered or vulnerable. The Kabyle speech community, for example,

here are sometimes referred to collectively as the Amazigh or Berber

has reached such a high level of awareness and mobilization that

group. They constitute pockets of surviving but quickly disappearing

revitalization is taking place The situation is different in the Libyan Arab

linguistic communities surrounded by speakers of North African Arabic,

Jamahiriya, Tunisia and Mauritania, where Nefoussa, Zouara,

who are themselves Arabized former Tamazight-speakers. These speech

Sokna, Aoujila, Ghadamès and Zenaga are endangered, sometimes

communities vary in importance, from the relatively large ones (several

severely endangered. Even in Chenoua (Tacenwit) in Algeria, where

million speakers) such as Tacelhit, Tarifit, Taqbaylit (Kabyle) and Tacawit

a relatively high level of awareness exists and revitalization activities

to the medium-sized groups (Tanfusit, Tamzabit) and the smaller pockets

take place, endangerment is a reality. This is also the case with

(Tayurart, Zenaga).

Tamzabit and Taznatit (Gourara, Touat). The languages of the Tuareg

In Algeria and Morocco growing mobilization, especially

– Tamahaq/Tahaggart in southern Algeria, Tamajeq and Tamaceq in

among larger language groups, has raised awareness about language

Niger and Mali, and, above all, the remaining pocket of Tahaggart

endangerment and preservation. This can be appreciated at both

in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya – are vulnerable, mainly as a result of

the political and the grassroots level. At the political level, initiatives

drought, conflict and displacement. In Mauritania, Zenaga, Nemadi and

have been undertaken in both countries. Among these initiatives is

the language of Imeraguen are definitely endangered and may become

the granting of ‘national language’ status to Tamazight in Algeria, a

critically endangered if the current social and cultural stigma attached

decision now enshrined in the Algerian Constitution. It is hoped that

to them is maintained and the languages continue to be excluded from

this will be followed up with concrete, legal or practical measures (such

the public sphere.

as the wider use of Tamazight in the administration, the media and

This edition of the Atlas introduces some languages that are

education). In Morocco, Tamazight is now officially taught in schools,

never mentioned in the literature on language distribution in North

though not used, still, as a language of scientific study or research (El

Africa: Domari, which may still be spoken in Tunisia and Algeria, though

Kirat El Allame, 2008). The creation of university and research centres,

the data are incomplete and over thirty years old; and Korandje, a hybrid

the best known of which is the Institut Royal de la Culture Amazigh

of Tamazight and Soninke in southern Algeria, which has recently been

(IRCAM, Royal Institute of Amazigh Culture) in Rabat, Morocco, and

the object of some interest among linguists. We also include Tetserret, a

small centres at the universities of Tizi Ouzou and Bejaia (Bgayet)

hitherto little-known variety of Tamazight, which even though spoken at

in Kabylia, Algeria, is a first step towards the development (not yet

the heart of Tamajeq territory in Niger is closer to northern dialects and

achieved) of higher education and research at national level in the two

perhaps to Zenaga.

countries.

29

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger



Language endangerment in Sudan1

a Sudanese Government blockade. The humanitarian situation was very

Sudan has been the scene of what is often considered the world’s

poor, but paradoxically, this isolation may have reduced the degree of

longest civil war. It has also hosted one the world’s largest humanitarian

endangerment of the Nuba languages. Two factors have contributed

operations, Operation Lifeline Sudan (OLS). While the 2005

to this, both in the South and in the Nuba mountains. First, the conflict

Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) has brought stability and the

has severely interrupted children’s schooling. This has, of course, had

beginning of reconstruction in the South, Darfur is in turmoil. With 1.5

negative effects on their education, but since the schooling would

million deaths in the South, 4 million internally displaced persons (IDPs)

have been in Arabic, the state-supported language, the interruption

and 500,000 refugees, the entire Southern Sudanese population has

has also slowed down the threat of Arabic overwhelming local cultures

been deeply affected by the conflict.

and languages. Second, when the education system was restarted by

This situation increases language endangerment in a number of

the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement in 1996, all schooling was in

ways. Displacement has occurred in a variety of patterns (long-distance,

English, a language that posed no threat to Nuba languages. The vitality

repeated displacement) that may magnify the rate of endangerment.

of these languages was apparent during a visit to the Nuba mountains

As IDPs are dispersed throughout the country, they typically acquire

(Heiban, Nagorban, Dilling) in 1999, at the height of the blockade

the language of the host communities and at the same time reduce the

(UNCERO, 1999). The situation in the area under government control

use of their own language. IDP camps usually bring together people

may be different, especially with the prevalence of Arabic and the large

from many different communities, and new forms of communication are

variety of languages spoken in the IDP settlements and the so-called

developed that may involve multilingualism but also creolization. In the

peace camps or peace villages.

case of repeated displacement, IDPs do not always seek shelter among

It has not been possible to assess the real degree of

the same hosts and may therefore acquire yet more languages. While

endangerment of Sudanese languages, owing both to the sheer

multilingualism and creolization do not necessarily affect adults, children

numbers involved (134 according to the Ethnologue) and the

may not adequately acquire their mother tongue. This is especially likely

protracted conflict. Furthermore, the returnees after the 2005 CPA

in cases of protracted displacement. In northern cities such as Khartoum,

make the situation more complex and the data harder to collect. A

there may be a tendency for children to use Arabic more than their

fraction of these languages (just over thirty) have been reported in this

mother tongue.

chapter with varying degrees of endangerment. Once the stabilization

For a whole decade, between 1989 and 1999, part of the Nuba

of Southern Sudan (including the Nuba mountains) is confirmed and

mountains in South Kordofan was isolated from the rest of the world by

reconstruction well under way, the new authorities of Southern Sudan
may include linguistic data in their censuses and a better picture of

30

1.

Sudan sits on the linguistic map in both northern and sub-Saharan Africa.
For more details, see the chapter on sub-Saharan Africa in this Atlas.

the linguistic situation and the level of endangerment may then be
possible.

North Africa and the Middle East

Heightened endangerment
in the Middle East
The numerous conflicts in the Middle East have taken a serious toll on

however. In the Islamic Republic of Iran, apart from Kurdish, the Balochi
language (of a community of about 3 million) is also vulnerable. Syriac
and other varieties of Aramaic, and Armenian, spoken by about 200,000
people in the Syrian Arab Republic, are also vulnerable.

the minority languages of the region. The religious-linguistic minorities

The emigration of Jews from the Middle East and North Africa

in three countries in particular – the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Syrian

since 1948 has brought to Israel a large number of languages and

Arabic Republic and Iraq – have experienced grave problems during such

language varieties spoken by Jews in their countries of origin. Judeo-

conflicts. The Iran-Iraq war (1980–88) cut deeply into minority communities

Iraqi and Judeo-Yemeni are still spoken in Israel but are endangered as

through forcible recruitment into the armies of both countries and it

the younger generations do not learn them. North African Jews have

significantly reduced the size of language communities. Some 60,000

brought at least three languages to Israel: Judeo-Arabic of Tunisia, a

Assyrians were killed on both sides of the conflict. Assyrians, who are

distinct language described in the outstanding book by Cohen (1975),

Aramaic-speaking Christians, were persecuted by the Saddam Hussein

and, above all, Judeo-Arabic of Morocco (Judeo-Moroccan) and Judeo-

regime and a flicker of hope entered their community when Saddam

Berber. These are now extinct in North Africa. Statistical information

fell and Iraq was occupied by US forces in March 2003. Increasingly,

on the survival of languages and varieties among resident and exiled

however, Assyrians began to be targeted by insurgents, and as a result,

populations is difficult to come by, and some of our conclusions

150,000 Assyrians are reported to have left Iraq since the beginning of

about the status of individual languages have been through personal

the US occupation.

communications.

One of the languages that has suffered most in Iraq is Mandaic.

War and other conflicts are among the most important causes

After being forcibly displaced from the southern marshes by the Saddam

of language endangerment, as can be seen clearly in the Middle East

Hussein regime, Mandaeans have later been the subject of persecution

and North Africa. In some cases, however, conflict and confrontation

by insurgents in the wake of the US occupation. Of the 30,000 to 60,000

have had the effect of raising awareness of the importance of language

Mandaeans who lived in Iraq in the 1990s, a large number left the country

as a vehicle of culture and identity. In North Africa this has triggered

after 2003, and only some 6,000 to 7,000 are said to have remained; the

community-based revitalization initiatives and may have slowed language

number of them who speak Mandaic is much smaller.

endangerment.

Iraqi Kurdish may be the only language to have benefited from
the 2003 occupation. With the establishment of the Kurdistan Regional
Government in northern Iraq and significant autonomy for Iraqi Kurdistan,
Iraqi Kurdish may now be said to be safe. The Kurdish language in both
the Syrian Arabic Republic and the Islamic Republic of Iran is vulnerable,

31

Europe
and the
Caucasus
Tapani Salminen

The territory of Europe together with the Caucasus and Anatolia is the
home of a wide range of languages, diverse with respect not only to their
genetic affiliations, but also to their endangerment status. One of the
area’s special features is the relatively large number of non-endangered
languages, most of which function as the dominant languages of nationstates, which happen to be quite numerous there. At the same time,
among the many minority languages spoken in those nation-states only
very few are safe in the strict sense of the word, in that they would not
face heavy competition or even replacement by a dominant language
within their own community.
Another specificity of the European language scene is the number
of endangered languages closely related to the national languages and
the literary standards based on them, to the extent that they appear
in a diglossic relationship and are therefore often relegated to dialect
status from a sociolinguistic perspective. The current Atlas, however,
is concerned with spoken languages, and the bulk of this chapter is
devoted to identifying and recognizing distinct vernaculars on the basis
of linguistic criteria as opposed to the effects of administrative divisions
or literary traditions.
The coverage of the languages of Europe and adjacent regions
in the current Atlas is similar to their treatment in the relevant sections
of the Encyclopedia of the World’s Endangered Languages (Moseley,
2007). A major departure is that a large number of prominent minority
languages regarded as ‘safe’ in the Encyclopedia are here labelled
‘vulnerable’. The apparent paradox is entirely terminological, as
vulnerable languages are those languages that are not immediately
endangered but do not have a status equal to the dominant and
majority languages. Examples of such languages include Basque, West
Frisian, Moselle Franconian, Faroese, and many of the languages of

Europe and the Caucasus

the Caucasus, as well as a number of the so-called regional languages,

or some conservative linguists. Similar instances of clearly independent

as defined later. Indeed, of the minority languages in the area under

minority languages nevertheless being called dialects include Gascon,

review, only Catalan, Galician (with further qualifications described

Kashubian, Low Saxon and Tsakonian, to name just a few of the many

below), Tatar and Kurmanji are not regarded as endangered at all.

examples discussed in the systematic survey below. Contrary cases,

To be considered endangered, a language must notably have first-

i.e. varieties with clearly sufficient mutual intelligibility to be subsumed

language speakers, which excludes pidgins such as Russenorsk, mixed

under a single language, but described as languages on the basis of

or secret languages used as second languages such as Angloromani,

non-linguistic considerations, will also be highlighted.

classical languages such as Latin, artificial languages such as Esperanto

The immediate problem with mutual intelligibility is that it is

and, arguably, revived languages that do not directly continue a former

fully gradual, and varieties showing a moderate level of intelligibility

language tradition (see the discussion on Cornish below). Most crucially,

are commonplace. Supplementary criteria are therefore required to

however, dialects are not included, not because they would not represent

determine the distinctiveness of the varieties under scrutiny. In the

an equally important facet of language diversity but for the simple fact

great majority of perceived borderline cases the solution is reasonably

that the list would be inexhaustible. There is a well-defined exception to

straightforward, however, and it generally amounts to the difference in

the exclusion of dialects, discussed below, but the general guidelines for

the nature of language boundaries vs dialect boundaries, in other words

defining languages vs dialects need to be addressed first.

the absence or presence of a dialect continuum.
Language boundaries (as opposed to dialect divisions) tend to

Languages, dialects and languages
boundaries

have several characteristics, such as isoglosses defining the adjacent
language areas through the entire length of the language boundary;
innovations stopped from spreading to the other side of the language
boundary; influences across the language boundary being recognizable

The concept of mutual intelligibility is often cited as the main, or perhaps

as the result of areal contacts, for example loanwords; and speakers

the only, linguistic criterion for distinguishing between languages and

generally required to become bilingual to communicate on the other

dialects. It is, indeed, useful in the clear-cut cases of either full mutual

side of the language boundary.

intelligibility, which implies a single spoken language, or at best limited

From a historical point of view, language boundaries emerge

comprehension, in which case separate languages are involved. In Europe

through the extremely frequent and recurrent process of extinction

in particular, the intelligibility levels between closely related varieties are

of transitional dialects. In the context of language endangerment, a

often exaggerated, and there are several cases of undisputed groups

language loses ground through language shift, i.e. whole-scale

of languages, for example Frisian, Mordvin and Saami, that are still

replacement, even when the dominant language is closely related,

sometimes referred to as single languages by ill-informed authorities

while a dialect is assimilated through levelling and adaptation feature

33

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

by feature. In many instances, there is a small dialect area between two

much fuller and show a large number of points referring to languages

language areas which shares features with both and could at least from

endangered on one side of a border but not at all endangered on the

the outset be attached to either of the larger areas; as long as the dialect

other. It must be stated forcefully in this context that the recognition of

area itself is geographically well-defined, however, its classification on

cross-border language communities and the cultivation of local varieties,

the basis of diachronic or other criteria does not undermine the concept

for instance to create new literary traditions, are extremely positive factors

of unique language boundary.

insofar as they preserve language diversity and contribute to the survival

There are pairs and groups of languages as defined and discussed
below that are often claimed to be very close to each other, suggesting

languages in general.

that their correct classification would be as dialects of a single language.

Minority languages closely related to the dominant languages

Notable examples are Adyge and Kabard-Cherkes, Chechen and Ingush,

and the literary standards based on them are technically referred to as

Komi and Permyak, the Oïl languages (French), the Oc languages (except

regional languages in what follows, and their status is often intricate.

Gascon, whose classification as a dialect is simply an error) as well as

They typically lack autochthonous literary standards, so that their literate

Logudorese and Campidanese (Sardinian). It seems that their closeness,

speakers generally live in a situation of diglossia. From a sociolinguistic

although real, is also often exaggerated, and many extra-linguistic

perspective, it is therefore not surprising that regional languages are

considerations may influence judgements. Similar examples among

referred to as dialects, but it must be emphasized that as a rule the

non-endangered languages are the continental Scandinavian languages,

regional languages presented below are defined as strictly on the basis

Czech and Slovak or East Slavonic languages. It seems clear that inherent

of intelligibility and language boundaries as any other languages.

intelligibility is lower than the actual comprehension between speakers
who have had substantial exposure to the closely related languages.

34

of the community in question as well as the maintenance of minority

To give an example of a prototypical regional language, West
Flemish, spoken in France, Belgium and the Netherlands, and known

By contrast, national borders almost never match the boundaries

by a different name in each country, as well as having the bulk of the

of spoken languages, though they have an impact on perceptions,

speaker community diglossic in Dutch, nevertheless possesses all the

identities, literary traditions, official recognition and so on (in cases of

characteristics of an independent spoken language in that it appears

Torne Valley Finnish, Valencian vs Catalan and Moldavian vs Romanian,

highly unified across its language area and remains quite distinct from

to name just a few examples). Similarly, other geographical or cultural

Dutch; many other examples follow in the systematic survey.

and religious divisions do not necessarily correspond to vernaculars,

It must be noted, however, that in the case of a number of regional

as is evident from Silesian or Sorbian, for example. The exclusion of

languages, an element of uncertainty remains as to their status, and

cross-border communities speaking non-endangered languages is

Latgalian as well as South Jutish are such borderline instances. Varieties

obviously an oversight with regard to the general assessment of language

spoken in relative isolation from the main body of the language for a

endangerment, but if they were included, the current maps would be

considerable time and showing major interference features from contact

Europe and the Caucasus

languages, technically referred to as outlying dialects, are treated on the

Languages in Europe and the Caucasus

same level as the varieties recognized as languages.

The following survey is arranged in terms of language classification, with

An important group with regard to the language vs dialect issue

a discussion of the endangerment problems pertinent to each.

is that of the so-called Jewish languages. Taking into account various
complexities, I have followed the guideline that varieties specific to Jewish



communities must be distinct and independent as spoken languages,

The Basque language is probably the best-known language isolate, or

exactly like any other language, in order to be included – this only

single-language family, as well as one of the most widely recognized

qualifies Judezmo, Yiddish and Juhur plus Corfiot Italkian as an outlying

minority languages in the world. It is one of the languages that are

dialect of Venetan. From the cartographic point of view, non-territorial

labelled ‘vulnerable’ in the current Atlas.

Basque

languages as well as languages with large diaspora communities pose
a major and indeed an insurmountable problem. Judezmo and Yiddish



as well as, even more extensively, Romani represent non-territorial

The Uralic language family consists of nine groups of closely related

The Uralic family

languages. Of these, the Jewish languages have two map points, one

languages, of which Saami, Finnic, Mordvin, Mari, Permian and Hungarian

of them in Israel, while Romani has been given a single point, and the

are represented in Europe. The languages of the other three branches

locations of the points in Europe are essentially random.

– Mansi, Khanty and Samoyed – are or were spoken in Siberia, but the

Plautdietsch, Gottscheerish and several of the Aramaic languages

area of Tundra Nenets in the Samoyed branch extends to the west of the

have their map points in the original language areas despite the fact

Ural mountains, and the area of Southern Mansi also originally covered

that all speakers have been displaced to distant destinations. In the case

parts of Europe.

of Ubykh, since the entire nation has moved from one place to another,

Of the eleven Saami languages, North Saami is the least endangered,

there are two map points, but the other Abkhaz-Adyge languages are

and could perhaps be regarded as vulnerable in its core area in Finnmark

only mapped for their home areas, despite the fact that only a minority

in Norway, but across its large range its position is much weaker, so that

of speakers were present there at one stage.

keeping it among definitely endangered languages can also be justified.

Unlike Plautdietsch (which, although largely spoken in the Americas,

By contrast, South Saami, Lule Saami, Inari Saami, Skolt Saami and Kildin

originated in Europe), the languages – or perhaps, rather, outlying dialects

Saami are definitely if not severely endangered, although in all communities

in the current sense – that developed from European languages in other

there are notable efforts to maintain the native language, so far perhaps

continents are not mentioned further in this chapter. The list would

most successfully among the Inari Saami. Ume Saami, Pite Saami and Ter

include Afrikaans, Pennsylvania German, Colonia Tovar German, Hutterite

Saami, on the other hand, have only a very few elderly speakers, and the

German, Loreto-Ucayali Spanish and Cajun French, to name those having

last speaker of Akkala Saami, also known as Babino Saami, died in 2002,

International Standards Organization (ISO) codes of their own.

which constitutes the second most recent extinction in Europe. Language

35

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

boundaries between the Saami languages are generally clear-cut and often

recognized both languages (somewhat inconsistently in view of other

deep, for instance the three languages spoken in Finland (North Saami,

similar cases in Karelia and many places in Siberia), they nevertheless only

Inari Saami and Skolt Saami) differ notably from one another.

collected combined census data. Both languages still have a large number

Of the ten Finnic languages, Estonian and Finnish are not

of speakers, but the assimilation rate is high, and younger speakers typically

endangered. Võro-Seto, Karelian and Olonetsian have speakers in the

use the native language only with elderly relatives. A very high percentage

range of tens of thousands, but assimilation is proceeding quite rapidly.

of Erzya- and Moksha-speakers live in small diaspora-based settlements.

The remaining languages appear on the scale from severely to critically

The Mari branch also consists of two languages that are known

endangered in the order Veps, Lude, Ingrian and Vote. The last first-

either as Western Mari and Eastern Mari, or Hill Mari and Meadow Mari,

language speaker of Livonian died in 2009, but Livonan is further cultivated

respectively. Both name choices are slightly problematic: Hill Mari in the

as a second language. Furthermore, Krevin, an outlying dialect of Vote in

narrow sense constitutes only one of the two dialect areas of Western

Latvia, became extinct in the nineteenth century. There exists a northern

Mari, the other being North-Western Mari, while Meadow Mari often

Finnic language chain from Finnish via Karelian, Olonetsian and Lude

excludes the more easterly diaspora dialects which may collectively, and

to Veps, in which language boundaries are, however, clear-cut, and all

confusingly, also be called 'Eastern Mari'.

languages are equally distant from their neighbours. This invalidates both

The Permian languages show a clear division into two

the Russian administrative grouping of Karelian, Olonetsian and Lude

sub-branches, Udmurt vs Komi, of which the former is a single language

together as a ‘Karelian’ language as well as the various combinations of

while the latter is divided into two languages, Permyak and Komi proper

these three languages plus Ingrian by linguists following traditional views

(the old name Zyryan may also be included to avoid ambiguity, and for

not based on linguistic considerations. The separation of Võro-Seto

maximum clarity ‘Permyak Komi’ and ‘Zyryan Komi’ can also be used),

from Estonian is recent in terms of an established language boundary,

plus an outlying dialect, Yazva Komi (also known as Eastern Permyak).

but the actual linguistic differences are notable. Torne Valley Finnish,

36

by contrast, is an exemple of a variety not separated by a language



boundary and therefore a dialect on linguistic grounds. It has however an

The Indo-European language family consists of nine extant groups of

official status and an emerging literary tradition in part of its range, and

closely related languages, of which Slavonic, Baltic, Germanic, Celtic,

it may therefore also prove to be an example of how the recognition of

Romance, Albanian, Hellenic and Armenian were originally confined to

cross-border language communities and the cultivation of local varieties

the area covered by this chapter, while the Indo-Iranian languages are

clearly contribute to the preservation of language diversity.

mainly spoken further east in Asia, with the exceptions listed below.

The Indo-European family

The Mordvin branch of the Uralic family consists of two languages,

The Slavonic branch consists of three sub-branches, South,

Erzya and Moksha. There exists a tradition of lumping together Erzya and

West and East Slavonic. There are four non-endangered South Slavonic

Moksha as a single ‘Mordvin’ language, and although the Soviet authorities

languages, Bulgarian, Macedonian, Serbo-Croat (the traditional name

Europe and the Caucasus

in linguistic usage of the spoken language on which modern Bosnian,

The Germanic branch consists of three sub-branches, West, North

Croatian, Serbian etc. literary standards are based) and Slovene. Serbo-

and East Germanic. There are three non-endangered West Germanic

Croat is indeed a model example of the unnecessary confusion that

languages, English, Dutch and German, all of which are here defined more

follows when the relationships between spoken language and literary

narrowly than in non-specialist usage. First, English excludes Scots, which

tradition are not considered analytically. It is increasingly clear that

extends as far south as Northumbria. Second, Dutch covers Hollandish,

Torlak, spoken in south-eastern Serbia and extending to both Bulgaria

Brabantish and East Flemish, while West Flemish is a clear example of a

and The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, needs to be recognized

regional language. Third, German consists of Thuringian, Upper Saxon

as a vulnerable regional language most closely related to Bulgarian-

and Silesian, so that not only Low Saxon but also Limburgian-Ripuarian,

Macedonian rather than enclosed within Serbo-Croat.

Moselle Franconian (which covers Luxembourgish), Rhenish Franconian

Besides the three non-endangered West Slavonic languages, Polish,

and East Franconian as well as Alemannic and Bavarian are recognized

Czech and Slovak, only Sorbian is widely known as an endangered minority

as regional languages. None of the regional languages are particularly

language. In fact, it is often referred to as two languages, Lower Sorbian

endangered but they all continue to be spoken in a diglossic situation

and Upper Sorbian, but in our current framework they represent, rather,

with the national languages. Moselle Franconian in Luxembourg and

two literary traditions based on spoken varieties that show high mutual

Alemannic in Switzerland do not easily qualify even as vulnerable, given

intelligibility and are connected through transitional dialects, thus constituting

their extremely strong position as spoken languages, but they are to

a genuine dialect continuum. Kashubian is another clearly distinct and

some extent in competition with German, and Moselle Franconian also

endangered language, although often popularly regarded as a dialect of

with French. More to the point, Moselle Franconian and Alemannic

Polish and with varying estimates as to its degree of endangerment.

are both spoken in several countries and their status is much weaker

Only two of the East Slavonic languages, Russian and Ukrainian,

elsewhere. Notably, Alsatian in France, while part of the Alemannic

are classified as non-endangered here, meaning that Belarusian, while an

dialect continuum and therefore not listed separately, is nevertheless

official language of an independent country, is regarded as vulnerable,

included in the current Atlas.

based on the widespread use of Russian in its stead. Two regional

To complete the list of West Germanic languages, the Frisian

languages are recognized within this group: one is well established,

languages, West Frisian, Saterlandic and North Frisian, pose no problems

i.e. Rusyn, also known as Carpatho-Rusyn (and not to be confused with

as to classification, West Frisian being one of the larger minority

Vojvodina Rusyn); the other is somewhat unknown, namely Polesian in

languages in Europe, listed as vulnerable in the current Atlas. Yiddish

the border region of Belarus, Poland and Ukraine, still subsumed under

in the narrow sense would only correspond to Eastern Yiddish in the SIL

Belarusian by SIL and in the Encyclopedia (Moseley, 2007).

classification, while Western Yiddish (including so-called Judeo-Alsatian)

Of the Baltic group, Latgalian has been treated as a regional
language distinct from Latvian, although it is close to Latvian proper.

perhaps never became fully independent from Alemannic. Eight outlying
dialects of West Germanic languages are recognized in the Atlas. There

37

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

are many other West Germanic language enclaves, but the above list

his contemporaries have, however, kept up the use of Manx as a second

covers the ones representing both long-term isolation and contact-based

language, and the knowledge of the language has since then spread

development. Plautdietsch is one of the cases where the current location

further through the school network and other channels on the Isle of

of speakers cannot really be presented in the Atlas because they live in

Man. Cornish became extinct as a first language much earlier, most likely

worldwide diaspora; its map point is shown as its birthplace in Ukraine,

by the end of the eighteenth century, but there have nevertheless been

from where the remaining speakers were deported in the 1940s.

several proposals for revived Cornish which have led to largely successful

Of the North Germanic sub-branch, Faroese is listed as vulnerable
in the Atlas because of the small size of the language community and the

38

attempts to reestablish a variety of indigenous language traditions in
Cornwall.

competition from Danish. Dalecarlian, Scanian (including Bornholmian)

The Romance languages – one of the few major groups

and Gutnish) are endangered regional languages clearly distinct from

of languages whose proto-language, i.e. Latin, is known in great

Swedish, while South Jutish in the Danish-German border region is only

historical detail – consist of nine sub-branches, namely Ibero-Romance,

tentatively recognized as a regional language separate from Danish.

Occitano-Romance, Gallo-Romance, Raeto-Romance, Sardinian, Italo-

The Celtic branch of the Indo-European family consists of

Romance, Istriot, the extinct Dalmatian, and Romanian in the broad

two sub-branches, Gaelic (Goidelic) and Brythonic (Brittonic), each of

sense. It is often taken for granted that the classification of the

which is a group of three well-known languages, i.e. Irish, Manx and

Romance languages must be highly complicated, but in most cases

Scottish Gaelic constitute Gaelic; and Welsh, Cornish and Breton make

the language divisions within sub-branches appear rather definite

up Brythonic. While the genetic classification of the languages is not

and conclusive. To start with Ibero-Romance, it is represented by four

contentious, there are many issues concerning their endangerment

extant spoken languages in the Iberian peninsula, namely Galician-

status. Welsh, with a strong speaker base and much institutional support

Portuguese, Asturian-Leonese, Spanish (also referred to as Castilian)

nowadays, is nevertheless regarded as vulnerable, similar to almost all

and Aragonese, as well as Judezmo (Judeo-Spanish, also known as

other minority languages, which can indeed be justified on the basis of

Ladino) and the long-extinct Mozarabic. Galician and Portuguese are,

continuing English domination in practically all fields of life. Irish, despite

of course, generally known through differentiated literary traditions

its official status, as well as Scottish Gaelic show gradual erosion of first-

and separated by a national border, but the spoken varieties can at

language speaker communities, and Breton, with an impressive number

best be divided along a very shallow boundary south of the Galician-

of speakers until recently, is losing ground much more rapidly. Manx

Portuguese border, and Galician, even if treated as an independent

and Cornish are uncontested representatives of the category of revived

minority language within Spain, would not immediately qualify as

languages in Europe. Manx ceased to be a spoken community language

endangered because of its inherently strong position and its close

in the nineteenth century, and the last first-language speaker, Ned

proximity to Portuguese. Both Asturian-Leonese and Aragonese,

Maddrell, died in 1974. A number of people who learnt from him and

however, are increasingly endangered.

Europe and the Caucasus

Occitano-Romance is divided into three sub-units, conventionally

presented by Bernard Cerquiglini in his report Les langues de la France

labelled as Catalan, Gascon and Occitan. Catalan and Gascon represent

(Cerquiglini et al., 2003) seem solidly based and internally consistent, and

single spoken languages, although both cases merit further discussion.

the current Atlas follows his stand. There are three outlying dialects of

Valencian possesses a literary tradition differing slightly from Catalan

Norman on the Channel Islands, those of Guernsey and Jersey, and the

proper, but with regard to the vernacular no language boundary as defined

recently extinct one of Alderney. Outside the Oïl area, Gallo-Romance

above is involved. Algherese Catalan is listed as an outlying dialect here

consists of Francoprovençal, Piedmontese, Ligurian, Lombard, Emilian-

because of its isolated position subject to intensive language contacts.

Romagnol and Venetan. It may be argued that within Francoprovençal

Gascon, called Aranese south of the French-Spanish border, is a clearly

there is so much diversity and fragmentation that it too, like the Oc and

distinct language within Occitano-Romance. Of the other Oc languages,

the Oïl languages, should be seen as a group of languages rather than

Languedocian, Provençal, Limousin and Auvergnat were also previously

a single language, but it nonetheless seems a true case of a dialect

given language status in the Ethnologue, and while they, as well as Alpine

continuum, as well as exhibiting sufficient intelligibility to allow us to

Provençal included in the current Atlas, are admittedly close to each other,

defend the current treatment.

they have nevertheless shown markedly distinct traits for centuries and the

Raeto-Romance is a group of three well-known minority languages,

differences among them are much greater than those within Catalan. Even

Romansh, Ladin and Friulian. Raeto-Romance is often classified inside

if there were grounds for regarding Languedocian, Provençal, Limousin,

Gallo-Romance, but there seem to be enough distinguishing features for

Auvergnat and Alpine Provençal as dialects of a single spoken language,

it to be treated as an independent sub-branch.

the arguments could not rely on an ideology supporting a particular

Sardinian is here understood as a unit consisting of two closely

cultural tradition, in this case the archaizing but largely Languedocian-

related languages, Logudorese and Campidanese, while Gallurese and

based Occitan literary language. Finally, there is an outlying dialect of

Sassarese are dealt with in the Italo-Romance section below. It may be

Alpine Provençal known as Gardiol in southern Italy. With the exception

argued that Logudorese and Campidanese are close enough to be

of Catalan, which is arguably the safest minority language in Europe, all

treated as dialects of a single Sardinian language, but as in the cases

varieties of Occitano-Romance are endangered, and it remains to be seen

of the Oc and Oïl languages discussed above, they appear reasonably

whether the lack of official encouragement of internal diversity has the

distinctive. There is no doubt of their being endangered, as Italian is

effect of further escalating their disappearance.

gaining ground fast, even in Sardinian’s heartland.

It is true that the entire Oïl language area within French consists of

Italo-Romance consists of Corsican, as well as Gallurese and Sassarese

closely related varieties, namely, besides French, Poitevin-Saintongeais,

(treated technically as outlying dialects of Corsican here), Italian (comprising

Gallo, Norman, Picard, Walloon, Champenois, Lorrain, Burgundian and

Tuscan and Central Italian dialect groups), South Italian (including Campanian

Franc-Comtois, but lumping them together nevertheless disregards a

and Calabrese) and Sicilian. Until now, Italian authorities have not granted

considerable amount of variety and diversity. In general, the arguments

recognition to the regional languages belonging to the Italo-Romance or the

39

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Gallo-Romance sub-branches, although Ladin and Friulian are recognized.

language in the area covered by this chapter, while its extinct relative

South Italian and Sicilian, and to a lesser extent Corsican, nevertheless enjoy

Lomavren in Armenia provided vocabulary to the local mixed language

a relatively stable position as the vernaculars of their communities.

with an Armenian basis. Romani is incontestably the most widespread

The Istriot language is a little-known although relatively well-

non-territorial language in the world. It is treated as seven languages

studied language of the Istrian peninsula that constitutes an independent

by SIL under the names Carpathian Romani, Kalo Finnish Romani, Baltic

branch of Romance and is also severely endangered.

Romani, Balkan Romani, Sinte Romani, Welsh Romani and Vlach (‘Vlax’)

The Romanian sub-branch of Romance consists not only of Romanian

Romani, but despite their extensive distribution and many contact-

in the narrow sense of the term (also called Daco-Romanian), but also of

induced innovations the Romani dialects preserve a remarkable degree

the widely dispersed Aromanian (Macedo-Romanian), Megleno-Romanian

of unity, which has led to the current treatment of Romani as a single

and Istro-Romanian languages, all of which are highly endangered,

language. The placing of the map point, in north-west Transylvania, is

especially Aromanian and Megleno-Romanian in Greece. Linguists in

meant to give token representation to a very diffuse language.

Romania traditionally treat all members of this sub-branch as dialects

There are several mixed languages with Romani vocabulary in

of Romanian, but given the notable differences and clear boundaries

Europe, the best known perhaps being Angloromani, but since they

between them, such a stance only reflects out-of-date terminology.

typically function as second languages in their communities, they have

Albanian is a primary branch of the Indo-European family, and
its two main varieties, Gheg and Tosk, can be seen as dialect groups

diversity should aim to take them into account.

of a single, bipolar language joined by a belt of transitional dialects.

There are also several languages belonging to the Iranian

Neither of them is endangered, but there are three endangered outlying

sub-branch of the Indo-Iranian branch spoken in the Caucasus and

dialects, two of Tosk and one of Gheg.

Anatolia. The only Eastern Iranian language in the area under review

The Hellenic branch consists of two languages, Greek and the

is Ossete, with two characteristic dialect groups, Digor and Iron, but

severely endangered Tsakonian, which have been distinct since ancient

apparently sufficiently cohesive to be regarded as a single language.

times. The outlying dialects of Greek are very much endangered.

Ossete has a broad speaker base and it belongs to the vulnerable

Besides the non-endangered (Eastern) Armenian, there are

category with other large minority languages of the Caucasus. Tat

several isolated speaker communities, of which Western Armenian (which

and Juhur (Judeo-Tat), comprising a sub-unit of South-Western Iranian

survives in Istanbul, the Middle East and elsewhere in the diaspora) as

languages, are also spoken in the Caucasus, under strong pressure from

well as Homshetsma (spoken near the Black Sea coast) are tentatively

Azerbaijani and Russian respectively.

recognized as outlying dialects in the Atlas.

40

not been included in the Atlas, although a fuller description of language

One North-Western Iranian language, Zazaki, is spoken exclusively

The Indo-Iranian branch consists of three sub-branches, Indic,

in Turkey, and despite having a high number of speakers, it must be

Iranian and Nuristani (also known as Kafiri). Romani is the only Indic

regarded as vulnerable at the minimum. Of the North-Western Iranian

Europe and the Caucasus

languages, two more are represented in the region: Kurmanji (Northern



Kurdish), spoken mainly in Turkey but also in the neighbouring countries

The Kartvelian language family is clearly structured into four languages,

in the Caucasus and the Middle East, cannot be regarded as endangered;

of which Georgian is non-endangered, while Svan and the closely related

Talysh, spoken in the Islamic Republic of Iran and Azerbaijan is, by

but distinct Mingrelian and Laz are increasingly endangered.

The Kartvelian family

contrast, threatened by the majority languages. Furthermore, a poorly
documented and recently extinct language called Kilit is known from the



Nakhichevan region of Azerbaijan, but it may also have been an outlying

The Abkhaz-Adyge language family consists of three units, Abkhaz,

dialect of a nearby North-Western Iranian language.

Ubykh and Adyge. The speakers of Ubykh were forced to translocate

The Abkhaz-Adyge family

from the Caucasus to Turkey, where the language is now extinct. Mass



The Semitic family

migrations from the other language communities to the Middle East

The Semitic language family is represented in the area under review

and further afield also occurred in the nineteenth century, but their

by two languages of the Arabic branch, the severely endangered

map points appear only in their current locations in the Caucasus.

Cypriot Arabic and the non-endangered Maltese, as well as a number

The Abkhaz branch is usually classified as consisting of two closely

of clearly endangered languages of the Aramaic branch in Turkey and

related languages, Abkhaz and Abaza. Since the Ashkharawa dialect

the Caucasus. Both of the known Central Neo-Aramaic languages, the

is practically identical with Abkhaz, the solution adopted in the current

closely related Turoyo and Mlahso, were based in Turkey, from where

Atlas is to regard the more distinct Tapanta dialect alone as representing

the majority of speakers fled in the early twentieth century. Turoyo now

Abaza, which would perhaps best be qualified as an outlying dialect of

survives marginally in Turkey as well as in the Syrian Arab Republic,

Abkhaz. The Adyge (‘Adyghe’) branch, also known as Circassian, also

but mainly through a major diaspora in several countries in western

consists of two closely related varieties, but their status as separate

Europe and overseas. Mlahso is now extinct both in Turkey and in the

languages, Adyge proper (Western Circassian) vs Kabard-Cherkes

expatriate community in the Syrian Arab Republic. Three North-Eastern

(Eastern Circassian, also Kabardian), is clearer. Despite the turbulent

Neo-Aramaic languages were traditionally spoken in Turkey and across

history, the endangerment status of the extant Abkhaz-Adyge languages

the border further into the Middle East, namely Suret (divided by SIL

is no worse than vulnerable.

on non-linguistic grounds into Assyrian Neo-Aramaic and Chaldean
Neo-Aramaic), Hértevin (reportedly quite different from Suret) and Lishan



Didan (a Jewish Aramaic language also linguistically separate), all of

The classification of the Nakh-Daghestanian language family is, despite

them now largely in diaspora. Furthermore, an outlying dialect of Suret

the large number of languages, relatively uncomplicated. The Nakh

was created in Georgia because of the migration of the entire Bohtan

branch consists of three languages, the severely endangered Bats and

Neo-Aramaic community from Turkey.

the vulnerable, closely related Chechen and Ingush. Altogether twenty-

The Nakh-Daghestanian family

41

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

seven other languages in six groups are spoken in Daghestan and

said to have originated as an outlying dialect, and the classification of

further south to Azerbaijan, of which Avar, comprising a group of its

the Gagauz dialects in the Balkans poses further problems because they

own, is the region’s dominant indigenous language; it is vulnerable only

have not been sufficiently studied.

due to its secondary position in comparison with Russian. The Andi and

Kipchak, the most diverse of the Turkic groups, has three

Tsez languages are spoken by small communities and appear at least in

recognizable subgroups. First, the subgroup consisting of Crimean Tatar,

the category of definitely endangered. Lak and Dargwa, classified either

Karaim, Kumyk, Karachay-Balkar and the extinct Cuman is spoken entirely

as distinct branches or together, have larger numbers of speakers and

within the area under review. Kumyk and Karachay-Balkar are both

are labelled vulnerable. The Lezgian group contains two major and thus

vulnerable, while Crimean Tatar and Karaim are highly endangered, not

only vulnerable indigenous languages, and eight small and endangered

least because of the mass deportation of the Crimean Tatar community

ones. There are a further two items in the list that may warrant a

to Central Asia in the Soviet era, so that today only a minority of speakers

division into several languages, most notably Dargwa, which, it has been

live in the Crimea, the location of the map point for Crimean Tatar.

suggested, may contain anything from a couple to eighteen languages,

Second, Tatar and Bashkir (Bashkort), as well as two outlying dialects of

but also Karata, from which the Tokita dialect may turn out to be distinct.

Tatar in Siberia, compose a close-knit subgroup, with Tatar as one of

All in all, the language boundaries in this region of exceptionally high

the very few entirely safe minority languages in Europe and Bashkir also

language density are conspicuously clear and the few problematic issues

relatively stable but nonetheless vulnerable. Third, Nogay, a moderately

derive from the lack of information rather than inconclusive criteria.

endangered language with widely scattered communities in eastern
Europe and the Caucasus, belongs to a subgroup together with Kazakh



The Turkic family

and Karakalpak. Nogay is also traditionally spoken in the Crimea as

The Turkic language family has only two primary branches, one consisting

well as in Dobruja, but in those regions its speakers are administratively

of the Chuvash language alone (historically known as Bulgar Turkic with

counted among Crimean Tatars.

the inclusion of long-extinct languages) and the other comprising all the
remaining languages called Common Turkic. Chuvash itself is supported



by a large minority community and belongs to the vulnerable category

Kalmyk is the only Mongolic language spoken in Europe, and it is

because of the dominant position of Russian.

definitely endangered despite its position as an official language of a

The Common Turkic branch is further divided into nine genetic
groups, of which only two, Oguz and Kipchak, are represented in the
area covered by this chapter. The Oguz languages spoken within the

42

area under review are Gagauz, Turkish and Azerbaijani as well as three
outlying dialects, two of Turkish and one of Turkmen. Gagauz may be

The Mongolic family

constituent republic of the Russian Federation.

Western and
Central Asia
Hakim Elnazarov

The vast mountainous region of Central Asia, encompassing the Pamir,
Hindu Kush and Karakoram mountain ranges, is host to numerous small
ethnolinguistic groups, to the point that some scholars have classified it as
an ‘ethnographic museum’. These groups have retained their distinctive
linguistic and cultural diversity due to the geographically complex pattern
of the mountainous terrain. The twentieth century brought the region into
contact with the outside world, thus accelerating the process of change in
all spheres of human existence. The culturally diverse groups have been
increasingly intertwined with the globalized world, which has brought
challenges to the cultural diversity of these mountainous communities
along with opportunities for economic growth.
The genealogy of these mountain languages places them within
the broader group of Indo-Iranian and Indo-Aryan languages. They have
been classified as Eastern Iranian, Nuristani and Dardic language families
within those groups. The exception is the Burushaski language spoken
in Hunza-Nagar and Yasin area in Gilgit district of northern Pakistan that
is known as a language isolate, that is, its membership in a linguistic
phylum is not established.
The languages spoken in the region can all be classified as
endangered to varying degrees. Extensive studies of these languages over
the last century have largely concentrated on their documentation and
description as part of ethnographic studies, which demonstrate the rich
cultural traditions of the mountain communities. More recent initiatives
are the development of multilingual dictionaries in some languages
with numerous speakers. With the exception of a few sociolinguistic
studies, there is a very limited literature on the endangerment of these
languages. For the purposes of this chapter, I have relied on various
sources, from sociolinguistic studies to ethnographic studies and official
censuses of the host countries. Some sociological studies and reports on

43

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

migration and economic developments also provide credible information

Pamirs on the border of four countries – Tajikistan, China, Pakistan and

on the dynamics of changes in demography and in the assimilation and

Afghanistan. They inhabit Sarhad region – a valley along the Vakhandarya

integration of communities in the region.

River in Afghanistan and along the upper reaches of the Panj River that
forms the border between Tajikistan and Afghanistan. Wakhi-speakers

Eastern Iranian languages

are also settled in Chitral and the Northern Area of Pakistan in Yarkhun,

The Pamiri languages are spoken by diverse ethnic minority groups in

Tashkorghan district of Xinjiang Province of China. The total number

the deep and narrow valleys of the Pamir mountain range and also in

of Wakhi-speakers in four countries exceeds 70,000. The speakers of

the Hindu Kush and Karakoram mountain ranges to the south-east of

other Pamiri languages range from 20,000 (Rushanis) to fewer than 1,000.

the Pamirs, a region known as the Pamiro-Hindu Kush ethnolinguistic

The severely endangered language among this group is Ishkashimi,

region. The Pamiri languages include the Shughni-Rushani group of

spoken in a single village, Ryn, and closely associated with the Sanglechi

languages and the Wakhi, Ishkashimi and Yazgulyami languages. Most

language on the Afghan side.

speakers of these languages live in the Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous

Among other Eastern Iranian minority languages in Tajikistan

Province of Tajikistan. Some linguists add the Munjan language, spoken

are Yaghnobi and Parya. Yaghnobi is spoken by approximately 20,000

by a minority group in northern Afghanistan, to this group. The Shughni-

people in several localities in the Yaghnov valley near Dushanbe, the

Rushani subgroup is further divided into closely related languages,

capital of Tajikistan. In spite of their close proximity to surrounding Tajik-

including Shughni, Rushani, Bartangi, Sariqoli and a number of smaller

speakers, Yaghnobis have preserved their unique culture and traditions.

dialects that are mutually comprehensible to the speakers of this group.

Examples of their written language, which is closely related to ancient

Their degree of genetic closeness varies, but they all belong to the

Sogdian, still exist. The speakers of Parya (numbering around 7,000)

Eastern Iranian branch of the Indo-European language family. Among

are mostly scattered along the Hissor valley of western Tajikistan along

the Pamiri languages, Shughni has the largest community of speakers,

the border with Uzbekistan. Some speakers of this language can also

exceeding 100,000 people on both sides of the River Panj on the

be found in Uzbekistan and Afghanistan. The Yaghnobi- and Parya-

Tajikistan and Afghanistan border. The speakers live in the regional

speakers exhibit high bilingual proficiency. There is, however, increasing

capital city Khorog and Shughnan district, including the Ghund and

penetration of Tajik vocabulary into these languages, which makes their

Roshtqala valleys. The language prevails among other Pamiri languages

chances of survival rather slim. A recent initiative to create a primer for

and serves as a lingua franca for most of the speakers of other Pamiri

the Yaghnobi language has not yet been realized.

languages in the Badakhshan region.

44

Ishkoman, Hunza and Shimshal. Wakhi settlements are also found in

The degree of endangerment of the Pamiri and other minority

Speakers of the Wakhi language, known as Wakhis, second to

languages in Tajikistan varies, depending on the number of speakers

Shughni-speakers in terms of number, live in the far reaches of the

and their social and cultural vitality. The common characteristic of their

Western and Central Asia

endangerment is the lack of a written script. Their usage is confined to

of its speakers (40,000) live in Kyrgyzstan. There are other endangered

the public domain without any official status. The official language of

languages in this region, but they have more speakers in other countries,

governance, formal education and public gatherings remains Tajik. The

particularly in the Russian Federation.

Constitution of Tajikistan recognizes the multiplicity of ethnic groups

The ethnic make-up of the Central Asian countries was diversified

in the country. A special article in the state Law on Language Policy

during the Soviet period, when the mobility of the population led to an

prescribes that the languages of the mountainous Badakhshan (Pamiri)

influx of Slavic-speakers. Current state policies attempt to reinforce the

area and the Yaghnobi language, as ancient Iranian languages, should

position of the official language in all domains. Some countries such

be preserved and promoted (Article 1, part 3). However, much remains

as Uzbekistan have replaced the Cyrillic script with Latin in order to

to be done to promote these languages for educational purposes.

reinforce the national identity. As a result, many minority groups in these
countries are vulnerable.

Turkic languages
The vast region of Central and western Asia is inhabited predominantly

Western Iranian languages

by Turkic-speaking peoples. With the exception of Tajikistan, other

The Islamic Republic of Iran and Afghanistan are home to a number of

Central Asian countries including Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan and

endangered languages belonging to the Western Iranian branch of Indo-

Turkmenistan, and, to the north-west, the south-eastern regions of the

Iranian languages. Parachi and its close affiliate Ormuri, spoken in central

Russian Federation, are predominantly Turkic-speaking. Their languages

Afghanistan near Kabul, have only a few thousand speakers left. Both are

belong to the Turkic-Altaic family of languages. Centuries of coexistence

experiencing pressure from Dari and Pashtu, the official state languages.

and interaction with Iranian people have left traces in their linguistic

A similar situation prevails in the Islamic Republic of Iran, with its

composition. This is particularly evident in the case of Uzbekistan, where

multicultural and multiethnic composition. A majority of the endangered

most of the population are bilingual, that is, they speak Tajik along

languages there belong to wider groups in the vicinity such as Balochi,

with Uzbek. Uzbekistan has a number of endangered languages that

spoken in Pakistan, and Khalaj, a Turkic language also spoken in Azerbaijan

actually belong to the Indo-Iranian branch. Bukharic, which has fewer

and Turkey. There are, however, dozens of indigenous minority groups

than 10,000 speakers, is spoken in areas surrounding the historic city of

whose languages are experiencing various degrees of endangerment.

Bukhara. Parya is another Iranian-branch endangered language spoken

Most of them are spoken in the central areas of the Islamic Republic of

in Uzbekistan, but most of its speakers live in neighbouring Tajikistan.

Iran – they include Ashtiani, Gazi, Khunsari, Natanzi, Nayini, Sivandi, Soi

Among the most endangered languages in the Turkic-speaking countries

and Vafsi. The number of speakers ranges between 20,000 and 7,000.

of Central Asia is probably Dungan, which belongs to Sino-Tibetan. It has

However, there have been no systematic studies or documentation of

several dialects, including the Gansi and Shaanxi dialects. The majority

these languages other than recordings of popular songs and folklore.

45

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

There are a number of other endangered languages in the Islamic

Nuristan Province was created in 2002 by the Interim Government of

Republic of Iran, scattered mostly in the north-western area bordering

Afghanistan. This has enabled the Nuristani community to take ownership

Iraq – they include Hawrami, Dzhidi, Mandaic, Hulawla and Lishan Didan.

of their social and economic development, thereby strengthening their

The last two are believed to be extinct, while Mandaic has fewer than

sense of identity. They use Dari and Pashtu as official languages. Recently

300 speakers and is critically endangered. In the south, Koroshi, Lari

the Ministry of Education of Afghanistan has taken an initiative to develop

and Bashkardi (which has affinities with Balochi) are also in danger of

primers for some of the minority languages spoken in the country. Among

disappearing. Semnani, with its several dialects in the north-eastern

them are Pamiri languages spoken within Afghanistan and the Nuristani

province of Semnan, is also definitely endangered. Persian has been

languages. The orthographies will be based on the Persian script.

the language of literary tradition for these communities for centuries,

The prolonged war in Afghanistan led to a significant exodus of

and speakers are by and large bilingual. These vanishing languages are

Afghan refugees to other parts of the world, especially Pakistan. The

often treated as dialects of the country’s literary and official language,

migration involved a large number of minority groups, in particular

that is, Persian, and there do not seem to be many signs of attempts to

Nuristani-speakers. Not all of them have returned to their home country,

revitalize and reinvigorate them.

and many have sought refuge elsewhere. Thus, there are pockets of
Nuristani-speakers in Chitral in Pakistan’s North-West Frontier Province

Nuristani languages

on the border with Afghanistan, where they appear to have set up

Nuristani languages are spoken in Nuristan Province in north-east

home makes it prone to faster assimilation and the loss of its original

Afghanistan. Some speakers of these languages can also be found in

language.

permanent residence. The spread of the community outside its

neighbouring Pakistan along the Afghan border. The term Nuristan,
‘Land of Light’, was attached to these communities after their acceptance
of Islam at the end of the nineteenth century. However, they continue to

46

Dardic languages

retain their linguistic affiliation according to their ancient communal and

The Dardic languages are the largest and probably the least explored

tribal names. These include Kati, Prasun, Waigali, Ashkun and Gambiri

group of languages of the Central Asian mountainous region. There are

(or Tregami). The largest community among this group consists of Kati-

several groups of Dardic languages spoken by communities scattered

speakers, also known as Bashgali, who number close to 20,000. Prasun,

along the vast territories of northern Pakistan, eastern Afghanistan and

Waigali and Ashkun each have approximately 2,000 speakers. Gambiri

Jammu and Kashmir in India. Apart from Kashmiri, the other languages

(or Tregami) has fewer than 1,000. It is spoken only in three villages in the

are experiencing various levels of endangerment. Recent sociolinguistic

Tregam valley of the lower Pech in Nuristan Province and is among the

surveys by the National Institute of Pakistan Studies, Quaid-i-Azam

region’s severely endangered languages.

University and the Summer Institute of Linguistics (now, SIL International),

Western and Central Asia

Islamabad, provide insights into the endangerment and cultural vitality of

in Pakistan. Speakers of Ushojo live in several scattered villages in the

these languages. G. Morgenstierne (1974) made a significant contribution

Bishigram valley of Swat Kohistan in Pakistan.

to the study of the genetics of these languages and their classification.

Most of the Dardic languages are under severe pressure from

More research is needed to define their relation to other Indo-Aryan

Pashtu, which is widely used as a second language. The majority of

languages and their degrees of endangerment.

speakers are bilingual and are proficient in Urdu or Pashtu. The language

The Dardic languages have been clustered into five groups: the

of formal education in northern Pakistan is Urdu, but not all the minority

Kunar group, the Chitral cluster, and Kohistani, Shina and Kashmiri. Except

groups have access to formal education. The community’s rich cultural

for Kashmiri and Shina, they are all considered endangered. The Kunar

traditions and folklore are transmitted orally from one generation to

languages – Gawar-Bati and Dameli, Pashayi, Shumashti and Ningalami

another. Isolation is prolonging the life of endangered languages, but

(which also includes Grangali) – are mainly spoken in the southern Chitral

communities have little opportunity to develop economically. Thus, many

district of the North-West Frontier Province of Pakistan and the Kunar

speakers of these languages are seeking to move to urban areas. The

valley of Afghanistan. The size of each group does not exceed 10,000

impact of this north–south migration in search of better job opportunities

speakers. Gawar-Bati has the largest number (9,500), while Ningalami is

has made it difficult for families to preserve their mother tongue in an

critically endangered. The Chitral languages are Khowar and Kalasha. The

alien environment. With the upsurge in global means of communication

number of Khowar-speakers is the largest among the Dardic languages

and the expansion of infrastructure in the isolated northern regions

(over 200,000), which makes it relatively safe. Kalasha is spoken in the

of Pakistan, people’s mobility is likely to change the demography and

Kalash valley in southern Chitral of the North-West Frontier Province of

linguistic make-up of the region.

Pakistan. The approximately 5,000 Kalasha-speakers are the only remaining

Given the current geopolitical interests of the countries of Central

non-Muslim group in the region. The Kohistani group includes Kalami,

and South Asia and the instability in some regions, the reinvigoration

Torwali, Kalkoti, Indus Kohistani, Bateri, Chilisso, Gowro, and a few other

of endangered languages is unlikely to be a priority. The efforts of

languages and dialects, some of which are mutually comprehensible.

international organizations to increase awareness of endangered

Gowro is spoken by fewer than 200 people in the Indus Kohistan and Kolai

languages as part of human rights initiatives seem to be the best option

area. Speakers of other languages number a mere few thousand, except

in the current situation.

Bateri (29,000). The Shina cluster includes Domaaki, Phalura and Ushojo.
Among these languages, Domaaki is spoken by fewer than 500 people in
a handful of villages in the Gilgit and Hunza valleys. Phalura is spoken in
a few villages in southern Chitral of Pakistan and the speakers of the Savi
language are based in a village on the Kunar River in Afghanistan. Some
Savi people were displaced due to the war in Afghanistan and took shelter

47

North-east Asia
Juha Janhunen

Siberia
Siberia, or Asiatic Russia, comprises the region between the Ural
mountains and the North Pacific coast of Eurasia. In the south, the
region includes the Altai and Sayan mountains and borders the
steppes of Mongolia and Central Asia. Siberia came under Russian
rule in 1580. Since 1860 the region has also comprised northern and
eastern Manchuria, known today as the Russian Far East. Off the Pacific
coast, the Kuril Islands and Sakhalin were partially under Japanese rule
between 1855 and 1945. At the Sino-Mongolian border, the region
of Tuva, formerly a part of Mongolia, was an independent state (the
Tannu-Tuva Republic) from 1921 until 1944, when it was annexed by
the Soviet Union.
Until premodern times, most of Siberia, including the Russian
Far East, was inhabited by aboriginal populations speaking some fifty
to sixty distinct languages belonging to ten separate language families:
Uralic, Turkic, Mongolic, Tungusic, Yeniseic (Ket-Kott), Amuric, Ainuic,
Yukaghiric, Chukchi-Kamchadal and Eskimo-Aleut. On typological and
geographical grounds these are conventionally lumped together into
two major groups, known as Ural-Altaic (Uralic, Turkic, Mongolic and
Tungusic) and Palaeo-Siberian (Yeniseic, Amuric, Ainu, Yukaghir, ChukchiKamchadal and Eskimo-Aleut). Most of the language families in the
region are relatively shallow. The Uralic family is, however, represented
by two mutually very distant branches, Ugric and Samoyedic. ChukchiKamchadal is also divided into two fairly distantly related branches,
Chukchi (northern) and Kamchadal (southern). Several of the PalaeoSiberian language families are represented by a single language
isolate, or by a coherent group of very closely related languages, typical
examples being Nivkh, Ainu and Yukaghir. Some other families that

North-east Asia

used to comprise several languages are today represented by a single
surviving member, an example being Ket (Yeniseian).

The rest of the aboriginal populations of Siberia were grouped
together in the Soviet system under the label, the ‘Twenty-six Small

With the introduction of Russian rule, Russian became the main

Peoples of the Far North’. Throughout the Soviet period, the languages

colonial language throughout Siberia and is today spoken by virtually

of these peoples were intensively documented and studied, one of

all the total population of about 30 million people. By contrast, the

the aims being the creation of orthographies, literary standards and

aboriginal languages are spoken by some 1 million people, most of

textbooks. The orthographies were initially based on a unified application

whom are bilingual in Russian. In the Sino-Russian and Sino-Japanese

of the Roman alphabet, but were changed to Cyrillic during the 1930s.

border zones, both Chinese and Japanese have also played the role of

Most of the literary languages thus created have survived up to the

colonial languages, while in north-east Siberia (the Bering Strait region)

present day; these include Northern Mansi (Ugric), Northern and Central

English has made some historical intrusions on the Asiatic side.

Khanty (Ugric), Tundra Nenets (Samoyed), Northern Selkup (Samoyed),

The typical size of a linguistically distinct population in premodern

Evenki (Tungusic), Even (Tungusic), Nanay (Tungusic), Amur, Sakhalin

times varied between 500 and 5,000 people. Larger populations and

Nivkh, Chukchi (Chukchi-Kamchadal), Koryak (Chukchi-Kamchadal) and

speech communities have arisen in recent historical times among the

Siberian Yupik (Eskimo-Aleut). Some literary languages, including Ket

nomadic populations, especially in the tundra and steppe environments.

(Yeniseic), Udege (Tungusic) and Itelmen (Chukchi-Kamchadal), have

In general, languages spoken by tundra and steppe people tend to be

only recently been revived, while several new ones including Dolgan

internally more uniform than those spoken by less mobile groups, such

(Turkic) and Forest Nenets (Samoyed) have even been created in the

as river fishers.

post-Soviet period.

Since Soviet times, many, though not all, aboriginal populations of

The policy of creating written languages for the Siberian

Siberia have had a titular position in ethnic territories at various levels of

populations has been of major symbolic significance for the speakers

the administration. This system is also meant to bring linguistic benefits,

of the languages concerned. It has not, however, prevented the decline

especially at the highest level, at which there are today five federal

of the spoken languages; rather, in some cases, the introduction of an

republics: Buryatia, Yakutia, Tuva, Khakassia and the Altay Republic.

artificial and dialectally biased literary standard has led to a confusion

The actual situation of the ethnic language of the titular population in

that has only weakened the status of the spoken language. At the same

each republic depends, however, on the local demographic situation.

time, the system of compulsory education during the Soviet period

The situation is most favourable in Yakutia and Tuva, where the titular

involved the forced separation of children from their native communities.

populations, comprising several hundred thousand people, are still

In the school centres, the children were placed in multiethnic boarding

the local majority. By contrast, Buryat (Mongolic) in Buryatia, Khakas

schools in which Russian was the only language. Returning to their

(Turkic) in Khakassia and Altay (Turkic) in the Altay Republic are in a clear

native communities after completing their education, children no longer

minority position in their areas.

mastered their own ethnic languages.

49

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

The status of native languages in Siberia has also been affected
by problems created by the cultural, social, economic and ecological

have gradually vanished without forming living speech communities.

marginalization of the local aboriginal populations. The situation is not

The present-day, historically known aboriginal languages of

different from that encountered in North America. The populations

Siberia, including Sakhalin, Hokkaido and the Kuril Islands, may fairly

whose languages have survived best are typically those living in the

unambiguously be classified as vulnerable, definitely endangered,

northern tundra belt, where the traditional culture of reindeer breeding

severely endangered, critically endangered or extinct. Although several

is still alive. However, as the tundra belt has become a target of the

cases of extinction have been recorded since the eighteenth century, the

international oil industry, the conditions for reindeer breeding and other

bulk of the region’s languages are still extant, though they are almost all

traditional activities have deteriorated in many places. On the other

endangered to varying degrees. The only completely safe languages are

hand, the local populations and their languages, especially in north-

those used as official state languages – primarily Russian and Japanese,

west Siberia, have started to receive regular financial support from the

but also Mongolian. For the time being, however, Tuva (Tuvan), a former

oil industry. In some cases, this support has been used to continue the

state language, also seems to be beyond immediate threat thanks to the

literary languages created during the Soviet period.

relative isolation of the Tuva Republic.

The decline of native languages has been even more drastic in

The category of vulnerable languages comprises, in particular,

the Japanese parts of north-east Asia, where no official minority language

Eastern Buryat, but Yakut probably also belongs here, at least in some

policy has been adopted. When the island of Hokkaido was opened

areas. Both Eastern Buryat and Yakut are supported by sufficiently large

to Japanese colonization in 1870, the local varieties of Ainu (Hokkaido

speech communities, but the speakers are territorially widely dispersed.

Ainu) were still spoken by some 15,000 people, most of whom were

Although both languages have a relatively old and well-functioning

monolingual in Ainu. By 1917, the number of monolingual speakers had

literary standard with a considerable amount of native literature, most

fallen to 350, and the decline of the language has continued rapidly ever

intellectual activities take place in Russian. On the other hand, languages

since. Even so, in 2008, the Japanese Government, for the first time in

like Khakas and Siberian Tatar (Turkic, closely related to Volga Tatar) are

history, recognized the existence of the Ainu as a distinct ethnic group.

less safe, especially since the number of young speakers is declining

Atypical dialects of Ainu, or closely related languages, were
originally also spoken on Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands. The Kuril Ainu

50

Orok (Tungusic) and Nivkh, were evacuated to Hokkaido, where they

rapidly. The native languages typically remain restricted to rural villages
and sparsely inhabited wilderness areas.

were eliminated as a group during a forced transfer to Hokkaido in

Among the smaller linguistic groups, Dolgan (Turkic, closely

the late nineteenth century (1884), while the Sakhalin Ainu survived in

related to Yakut), with perhaps only 5,000 speakers but a high rate of

the context of Southern Sakhalin (Karafuto), which was under Japanese

native language proficiency, may probably also be classified as only

colonial rule between 1905 and 1945. After the Second World War, the

vulnerable. In a somewhat similar position, though with as many as

remaining Sakhalin Ainu, together with scattered individuals speaking

25,000 speakers, is Tundra Nenets. Both Dolgan and Tundra Nenets are

North-east Asia

spoken by populations engaged in traditional reindeer breeding in the

(relatively distinct from Eastern Buryat), Even, Nanay, Sakhalin Nivkh,

tundra belt. The status of Tundra Nenets is more problematic than that

Chukchi, Koryak and Alutor (closely related to Koryak). Diaspora entities

of Dolgan, however, as its speakers are scattered over wide distances

such as Kamchatka Even are in an even more precarious situation.

extending from the Kola peninsula in Europe to Taimyr in Siberia. Due

A somewhat special case is that of Evenki, which used to be the

to social and ecological problems, the number of young speakers is

principal and most widespread language of the Siberian forest zone

declining, in particular among the European Tundra Nenets. The oil

between the Ob-Yenisey basins and the Pacific coast as far east as

industry is also threatening the language on the Yamal peninsula, the

Sakhalin. A separate local entity was formed by the so-called Equestrian

principal Tundra Nenets area on the Siberian side.

Tungus in Transbaykalia, whose dialects formed the basis of Khamnigan

Another language that may be classified as only endangered

Evenki. Varieties of Evenki are also spoken in Manchuria. In premodern

is Khamnigan Mongol (Mongolic). The language was originally spoken

times, the total number of Evenki-speakers may have reached a maximum

across the current state boundaries in the Sino-Russo-Mongolian border

of 50,000 individuals. However, the spread of Russian colonization, as

region. It has, however, become virtually extinct in both the Russian

well as the expansion of Yakut in central Siberia and Buryat in the Baykal

Federation and Mongolia and survives today only among an emigrant

region, have split the formerly continuous belt of Evenki-speakers into a

population within China (northern Inner Mongolia). The speech

number of local groups, now undergoing assimilation to Russian, Yakut

community is compact, and its members are still semi-nomadic, but

and Buryat. The number of speakers on the Siberian side is down to

there are hardly more than 2,000 speakers, and the number of Chinese

5,000, and there are only a few small communities where children are

settlements in the area is increasing. Even more endangered than

fluent in the native language.

Khamnigan Mongol itself is its traditional symbiosis with two forms

The other Siberian languages still extant today are critically

of Evenki (Khamnigan Evenki). Khamnigan Mongol and Evenki have

endangered, since the remaining speech communities are very

coexisted for several generations as the two ethnic languages of a

small and the youngest speakers have already passed reproductive

single, almost fully bilingual population, but this pattern is today being

age. Languages in this category include Mansi (Ugric), Tundra and

disrupted in favour of Khamnigan Mongol only.

Forest Enets (Samoyed), Yug (Yeniseic, if not extinct), Chulym (Turkic,

Most other languages in the region are best classified as severely

an atypical branch of Khakas), Tofa (Turkic) with related Tukha and

endangered. In all these cases, the speech communities are small, mainly

Uyghur Uryangkhai on the Mongolian side, Tundra and Forest Yukaghir,

between 500 and 5,000 individuals. The speaker profile is biased towards

Itelmen (Chukotko-Kamchatkan), Amur Nivkh, Negidal (an atypical form

the old and middle generations, and the number of children fluent in the

of Evenki), Ulcha (closely related to Nanay), as well as Orok, Oroch and

ethnic language is diminishing, often being close to zero. Examples are

Udege (all Tungusic). On the Japanese side, Hokkaido Ainu, with fewer

Northern Khanty, Selkup, Nganasan, Ket, Shor (intermediate between

than a dozen rudimentary speakers, is also critically endangered.

Altay and Khakas), Teleut (a distinct variety of Altay), Western Buryat

51

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Languages that have become extinct since being linguistically

In north-east Asia, the Ainu and Yukaghir families are already critically

described include Mator (Samoyed, in the 1840s), Kott (Yeniseic, in the

endangered, and the position of the Yeniseic (Ket) and Nivkh families is

1850s), Arman (an archaic variety of Even, in the 1970s), Kamas (Samoyed,

severely endangered. The Chukchi-Kamchadal family is only slightly less

in 1989), Sakhalin Ainu (in 1994) and Kerek (Chukchi, in 2005).

endangered. Even the formerly large and diversified family of Tungusic

A glance at the map reveals that Siberia’s remaining linguistic

may be lost, unless it can survive on the Chinese side of the border.

diversity is concentrated along the margins of the region: in the west

On the other hand, Uralic, Turkic and Mongolic will survive as families

(the Ob-Yenisey region), the south (the Altai-Sayan region), the north-

irrespective of what happens to their members dispersed throughout

east (Chukotka and Kamchatka) and the south-east (the Amur region).

north-east Asia.

Much of rural central Siberia, which was formerly dominated by Evenki,
is today Yakut-speaking. The spread of Russian has traditionally taken
place mainly in the south-to-north direction along the major rivers,

52

Manchuria

as well as in the west-to-east direction along the old Sino-Russian

Manchuria as a physical region comprises the Amur and Liao river basins

trade routes and, subsequently, the Trans-Siberian Railway. More

and the adjoining parts of the Pacific coast. As already mentioned, since

recently, Russian-speaking communities, including mining towns and

1860 the northern and eastern parts of Manchuria have been administered

oil drilling stations, have arisen more randomly, especially in the Arctic

as the Russian Far East, which may today also be seen as an integral part

tundra belt.

of Asiatic Russia, or Siberia. The rest of Manchuria remained within the

The current wave of extinction is inevitably leading to the

Manchu empire of the Qing, which also comprised China. Between 1931

disappearance of at least the critically endangered languages, which

and 1945 Manchuria formed the state of Manchukuo, before becoming

comprise nearly half of Siberia’s linguistic diversity. The other half is

part of the People’s Republic of China. In the Chinese context, Manchuria

formed by languages most of which are severely endangered and hence

is known as the ‘North-East’ (Dongbei). Administratively, the region is

also likely to disappear. Considering both demographic and ecological

today divided between the provinces of Heilongjiang, Jilin and Liaoning.

circumstances as well as the administrative context, only a few languages

The western part has belonged to the Inner Mongolian Autonomous

in the region have a realistic chance of survival. These would seem

Region since 1979.

to include, in particular, Tundra Nenets and possibly Khakas. On the

The Chinese immigrant population has now grown to more than

other hand, with a sufficient investment of human effort and economic

100 million, while the remaining aboriginal populations number hardly

resources, it would not be impossible to save even some very small

more than 10 million, of whom, however, only a small proportion retain

speech communities.

their native languages.

From the point of view of linguistic diversity, the greatest losses

Of the non-Chinese languages spoken in the Chinese North-East,

will take place if and when entire language families become extinct.

only Mongol proper and Korean may be classified as safe, though locally

North-east Asia

even they are undergoing assimilation by Chinese. Both Mongol and

main written languages used by Dagur-speakers today are Chinese and

Korean are supported by old and well-functioning literary languages,

Mongol proper (written Mongol).

which are also used as mediums of school education in China. Under the

The decline of Manchu is a rare example of the loss of a language

label of ‘Mongol’, however, the Chinese system of ethnic administration

with a strong political and cultural status. Manchu was a direct descendant

also includes groups speaking several other Mongolic languages

of Jurchen, the dynastic language of the Jin empire in Manchuria, and it

and major dialects, most of which are endangered. These include, in

received a new written form in 1599. By the nineteenth century it had at

particular, Old and New Bargut (atypical forms of Buryat), Shinekhen

least 1 million speakers. After that time a process of Sinicization began

Buryat (a diaspora form of Eastern Buryat on the Chinese side) and

that continues to the present day.

Manchurian Ölöt (a variety of Oyrat transferred from Jungaria [Djungaria]

It should be noted that in the Chinese system of ethnic

to Manchuria in the eighteenth century). Manchurian Ölöt is today

administration the Manchu still exist as a major population, comprising

critically endangered, with its speakers changing over to Chinese. The

some 10 million people, the second-largest officially recognized minority

future of Bargut and Buryat is mainly threatened by the gradual loss of

nationality in China. This ethnicity is scattered all over the People’s

the atypical features in favour of standard Mongol, supported by the

Republic, though a considerable proportion still lives in Manchuria. The

school system.

Manchu language in Manchuria is, however, spoken in only two village-

The most viable form of Mongolic in Manchuria apart from Mongol

level localities, one in the Heihe region in the Middle Amur basin and

proper is Dagur, which is the ethnic language of a population of over

the other in Fuyu County in the Nonni (Nenjiang) basin. Both of these

200,000 individuals. The Dagur (Dawoer) population is divided between

represent traces of Manchu garrisons from the Qing period. The total

several localities, including the Middle Amur basin in northern Manchuria

number of Manchu-speakers was still some hundreds in the early 1960s

(the original location of the language until the seventeenth century), the

(before China’s Cultural Revolution), but it has now declined to fewer

Nonni basin in central Manchuria (since the late seventeenth century)

than ten individuals. There are, however, considerably more people,

and the Hailar basin in western Manchuria (since the early eighteenth

both ethnic Manchu and non-Manchu (especially ethnic Mongols), who

century). Among these, the most linguistically viable community today

are versatile in the Manchu written language, and interest has recently

is formed by the Dagur-speakers in the Hailar basin, while the Dagur

been expressed in the possibility of a revival of the spoken language.

in the Amur basin are linguistically critically endangered. There is also

Manchu also survives as both a spoken and a written language

a diaspora group in the Yili region of Jungaria (northern Xinjiang, since

among a diaspora population in the Yili region of Jungaria, where

1763). Historically, the Dagur may be seen as a satellite population of the

a Manchu-speaking army unit was transferred in the late eighteenth

Manchu, and Manchu used to serve as the literary language for Dagur-

century (1763). Officially, the Manchu-speakers in Jungaria are classified

speakers. With the decline of Manchu, Dagur has more recently received

as belonging to the so-called Sibo (Xibe) nationality, which also has

some restricted use as a written language in its own right, though the

members in other areas of China, including Manchuria. The Sibo may

53

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

54

originally have been a tribal entity within the Manchu, or even a separate

Currently, Solon Evenki is the most viable form of any kind of

ethnic group, but their current classification as a distinct ethnic group

Evenki, and, in fact, any kind of Tungusic. While Evenki, like all other

lacks a clear linguistic basis. Nevertheless, Manchu is today endangered,

Evenki-related groups in both Manchuria and Siberia, is either severely

probably severely, also among the Sibo, though it still has some speakers

or critically endangered, the language still survives among at least 10,000

of reproductive age.

Solon Evenki-speakers. Linguistically, Solon is a strongly atypical form

The other Tungusic-speakers in Manchuria are officially divided

of Evenki and should probably be classified as a separate language,

into three ethnic groups, labelled Evenki (Ewenke), Orochen (Elunchun)

strongly influenced by Dagur and Manchu. The Solon are, however, also

and Hejen (Hezhe). Of these, the first two both speak varieties of the

divided into several local and dialectal groups, corresponding to the

Evenki complex, which on the Siberian side is represented by the Evenki

historical division and movements of the Dagur.

language (proper). An Evenki dialect of an actual Siberian origin is spoken

The Hejen nationality in China is conventionally considered to

by the so-called ‘Yakut’ Evenki (immigrants from Yakutia in the early

form a local extension of the Nanay, as present also on the Russian

nineteenth century), China’s only reindeer-breeding population, who until

side of the border. However, the Hejen in China are divided between

the mid-twentieth century occupied the basin of the River Bystraya (Jiliuhe)

speakers of two languages, one of which may be considered a dialect

in the Amur source region. This population comprises fewer than 200

of Nanay (proper), while the other one is a ‘mixed’ language comprising

individuals and is today severely endangered, if not critically endangered.

features of both Nanay and Udege. This latter variety is today technically

The dialects spoken by the Orochen are linguistically more influenced

known as Kilen. An analogous ‘mixed’ language, comprising features

by Manchu. Although the Orochen ethnic population comprises close

of Nanay and Evenki and known as Kili, is recorded from the Russian

to 10,000 people, the native language must be considered critically

side. Both Kilen and Kili are critically endangered, with only a handful of

endangered, since all speakers have passed reproductive age.

speakers left. The same is true of Nanay (proper) on the Chinese side.

The situation is more favourable for the two remaining groups

Finally, there is also a Turkic language that used to be spoken

of Evenki-speakers in Manchuria, the Khamnigan and the Solon. The

in Manchuria. This is Manchurian Kirghiz, which historically represents

Khamnigan are best defined on the basis of their Khamnigan Mongol

a diaspora branch of Khakas, transferred from the Altai-Sayan region in

language, which survives only in China. The Khamnigan are, however,

connection with the Manchu conquest of Jungaria (in the mid-eighteenth

ethnically bilingual and also speak two forms of Evenki (Khamnigan

century). The Manchurian Kirghiz may be seen as satellites of the

Evenki). Among the Khamnigan in China today, Evenki is clearly receding

Manchurian Ölöt, and both groups were probably transferred at the

but the continuity of the language has not yet been disrupted. A similar

same time. Both Manchurian Kirghiz and Manchurian Ölöt were spoken

situation of ethnic bilingualism is also characteristic of the Solon, who

in at least two locations in Manchuria, the Nonni basin and the Hailar

speak Evenki (Solon Evenki) as their basic language and Dagur as their

basin. Today, only the Nonni groups remain in what is Fuyu County

second language.

in central Manchuria. Out of an ethnic population of about 1,000, the

North-east Asia

number of Manchurian Kirghiz-speakers is today down to fewer than 5.

(Chinese). Historically, Indo-European has also played an important role

The last speakers are trilingual in Manchurian Kirghiz, Manchurian Ölöt

in the region, but its position today is marginal. As a result of recent

and Chinese. Formerly, a knowledge of Dagur was also common.

historical developments, Tungusic has been introduced to the region.

It is illuminating to compare the linguistic situation in the two

Turkic dominates today in Tarimia (south of the Tian Shan mountains),

parts of north-east Asia, Siberia (the Russian Federation) and Manchuria

Mongolic in Mongolia, and Sinitic in Gansu, while Jungaria (north of

(China). Although China has copied the Soviet system of titular autonomy

the Tian Shan mountains) has both Turkic and Mongolic languages, as

for minority nationalities, it has never copied the Soviet emphasis

well as secondary islets of Tungusic. Qinghai, finally, offers the most

on language development. Thus, with the exception of Mongol and

diversified picture, with a considerable variety of Bodic, Mongolic, Turkic

Manchu (as well as Korean), there are no minority languages with a

and Sinitic languages and major dialects, some of which are also spoken

functioning written standard in Manchuria today. Although there are

on the Gansu side.

several transnational languages spoken on both sides of the border, the

The three most important native languages in eastern Central

literary languages created on the Russian side have never been used

Asia are Mongol proper (or Mongolian) in Mongolia, Modern Uyghur in

on the Chinese side. Even so, the situation of the oral languages is very

Tarimia, and Amdo Tibetan in Qinghai and parts of Gansu. All of these

similar on the two sides of the border, with most of the languages either

function as regional lingua francas, with between 1 million and 2 million

critically endangered or severely endangered. In the case of Evenki,

Amdo Tibetan-speakers and between 7 million and 8 million Uyghur-

however, the survival of a transnational language seems to be more

speakers. The region’s Sinitic languages come under the general label

likely on the Chinese side. Ideally, cooperation across state borders

of North-West Mandarin, a group of idioms belonging to the Mandarin

could be used to support the Evenki language in Siberia.

branch of Chinese. In addition, both during the Qing administration and
especially after the founding of the People’s Republic of China, Standard

Eastern Central Asia

Mandarin (Putonghua) has spread to the region and is today used by

In terms of physical geography and ethnic history, eastern Central

represents recent immigrants from other parts of China.

an absolute majority of the population, a considerable part of which

Asia may be defined as the region comprising Mongolia, Jungaria

Among the speakers of Chinese and the regional non-Chinese

(Dzungaria), Tarimia, Qinghai and Gansu. All of these were once parts

languages live the region’s smaller linguistic groups. Some of these,

of the Manchu empire of the Qing (1644–1911), but since the collapse of

like the Kirghiz- and Uzbek-speakers in Tarimia and the Kazakh-speakers

the empire the political situation has varied. Today, the region is divided

in Jungaria and western Mongolia, have nation-states elsewhere in

between two independent states, Mongolia and China.

Central Asia and cannot be regarded as linguistically endangered. Most

The languages spoken in eastern Central Asia represent four

other languages in the region must be classified as endangered either

major genetic groups: Turkic, Mongolic, Bodic (Tibetan) and Sinitic

because they have very small numbers of speakers or because the

55

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

number of speakers is declining rapidly. In most cases, these languages

Mangghuer, as well as the Qinghai Bonan-speakers, are classified as

are not used for written communication.

members of the so-called Tu nationality, conventionally also known as

Mongol proper is a relatively uniform language, though dialectal
differences do exist, especially on the Inner Mongolian side. More

Of the Shirongolic languages, only Santa in and around

substantially, there is a transition towards Buryat in the north, Ordos in the

Dongxiang County, southern Gansu, with some 500,000 speakers, all

south and Oyrat in the west. Buryat, Ordos and Oyrat may all be defined

of them Muslim, may be considered safe for the time being, though

as separate Mongolic languages, closely related to Mongol proper.

its position might deteriorate rapidly in the near future due to better

Even so, the speakers of these languages in both Mongolia and China

communications, rising levels of education and the growing impact of

are systematically classified as ethnic ‘Mongols’, and they are served by

Chinese, both standard and local. Santa is also spoken by an unknown

the standardized written Mongol and Cyrillic Khalkha literary languages.

number of recent emigrants (since the 1960s) from their original ethnic

On the Russian side, however, speakers of Buryat and Oyrat (Kalmyk)

area to parts of Gansu and Xinjiang. The number of permanent Santa

are recognized as separate ethnic groups. As a result, the speakers of

immigrants in Xinjiang may be more than 50,000, and although the

Ordos, who live only in China (in the Ordos region at the border of

language is not totally lost in the second generation, its position in the

Gansu and Inner Mongolia), are particularly severely endangered. The

diaspora is precarious due to the new ethnic, economic and administrative

present-day number of fluent Ordos-speakers is probably only a fraction

circumstances there.

of an earlier estimate of approximately 100,000.

56

the ‘Monguor’.

In the ‘Monguor’ group, Mongghul, with perhaps 50,000

An idiosyncratic and critically endangered variety of Oyrat known

speakers, is the largest language. Even so, it is rapidly being lost, since

as Henan Mongol is spoken by fewer than 100 people (out of an ethnic

its speakers are scattered among Chinese and Tibetan settlements in

population of some 30,000) in Henan County of Huangnan Prefecture,

several counties of eastern Qinghai and central Gansu. By contrast,

located in the south-eastern part of Qinghai Province. The new ethnic

Mangghuer, with only some 30,000 speakers, has kept its position

language of the Henan Mongols is Amdo Tibetan. Due to the structural

considerably better thanks to a coherent community structure. The

and lexical impact of Amdo Tibetan, Henan Mongol may be classified

situation of Mongghuor is unknown. Although Mongghuor (proto-

as a rapidly transformed and highly atypical variety of Oyrat, perhaps a

typical ‘Monguor’) is the most completely documented variety of any

separate Oyrat-based language.

Shirongolic language, it may always have been confined to a few

The principal diversity of the Mongolic family in eastern Central

village-level communities, which by the present time may or may not

Asia, however, is connected with the so-called Shirongolic branch of

have been absorbed by either Mongghul or Chinese or both. Both

Mongolic, which comprises six to eight distinct idioms, all spoken in

Qinghai and Gansu Bonan, with a total of perhaps 15,000 speakers, are

a relatively compact area in eastern Qinghai and adjoining parts of

also village-level languages that are, however, relatively well preserved

Gansu. Most importantly, the speakers of Mongghul, Mongghuor and

so far. Shira Yugur and Kangjia are critically endangered, with no child

North-east Asia

speakers. The number of elderly adult speakers of Shira Yugur may still

formed by several idioms spoken in the Eastern Sayan region across the

be around 2,000, while Kangjia is spoken by fewer than 100 individuals

Russo-Mongolian border. On the Russian side these idioms include Tofa

(classified as ‘Chinese Muslims’).

(critically endangered) and Soyot (extinct), while on the Mongolian side

Apart from the large Central Asian Turkic languages, Turkic is

there are Tukha or Tsaatan (to the west of Lake Khövsgöl) and Uighur

represented in eastern Central Asia by several minor idioms, none of

Uryangkhai (to the east of Lake Khövsgöl). Tukha is the language of a

which is safe. The largest and most vigorous entity is formed by the

reindeer-breeding community of fewer than 150 individuals and may

approximately 100,000 speakers of Salar, centred on Xunhua County

be classified as severely endangered, while Uighur Uryangkhai is almost

of Qinghai Province. The language is not yet endangered as a whole,

extinct, with fewer than 10 speakers.

but many communities of Salar-speakers outside the central area are

In the Tibetan areas of eastern Central Asia there are several

changing their language to local Chinese. Another Turkic language in

Bodic forms of speech that may or may not be classified as dialects

the Gansu-Qinghai region is Saryg Yugur, also known as Western Yellow

of Amdo Tibetan, but that nevertheless might be distinct enough to

Uyghur. Saryg Yugur, like Shira Yugur in the immediate neighbourhood,

require protection. Most of these idioms are spoken on the Sichuan side

has several thousand speakers, but in the absence of child speakers it

of the border (not covered in this chapter), but in Gansu and Qinghai

must be classified as critically endangered.

there are also a few atypical Tibetan ‘dialects’ that should perhaps

In the Mongolian and Jungarian parts of the Altai-Sayan region,

be classified as separate languages. The most obvious example is

there are several minor Turkic idioms that belong taxonomically to the

that of the dialects spoken in Jone County, southern Gansu (Gannan),

context of Sayan Turkic. These groups are generically known to the

which are unintelligible to the speakers of regular Amdo Tibetan. The

Mongols as ‘Uryangkhai’, a concept that also includes the speakers of

diversity of Tibetan speech in the region is still little understood and the

Tuvan. Since the nineteenth century Tuvan has had diaspora groups in

borderlines between dialects and languages remain to be determined.

the Mongolian and Chinese Altay, where these groups are known as Altay

What is clear is that Tibetan is on the decline in Jone and some of the

Uryangkhai or Kök Munchak (Monchak). The Altay Uryangkhai probably

local forms of speech are already critically endangered. The languages

number fewer than 10,000 individuals, most of whom are bilingual in

replacing the earlier diversity are both regular Amdo Tibetan and local

either Oyrat or Mongol proper (Khalkha). Although knowledge of the

Chinese.

ethnic language is declining, the loss is not fatal since Altay Uryangkhai

Some aspects of the linguistic map of eastern Central Asia are

speech is in a close dialectal relationship with Tuvan, one of the very few

the result of centralized policies during the latter half of the eighteenth

viable languages in the Asiatic part of the Russian Federation (the Tuva

century. Soon after the region had become incorporated into the

Republic).

Manchu empire (1760), the Manchu Government moved sections of the

In the context of Sayan Turkic, Tuvan, with its dialects, may

earlier Jungarian population to Manchuria, thus creating the subsequent

be considered as constituting a western branch. An eastern branch is

communities of Manchurian Oyrat (today severely endangered) and

57

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Manchurian Kirghiz (today virtually extinct). At the same time, speakers of

in Tarimia is found in the so-called Eynu (Einu, Ejnu) or Abdal ‘language’,

Mongolic Dagur as well as Tungusic Evenki (Solon Evenki) and Manchu

today spoken by fewer than 30,000 individuals. Eynu is probably best

were introduced from Manchuria to Jungaria, where traces of these

classified as a Uyghur dialect, but it incorporates an exceptionally large

immigrants have survived into modern times. Of these, the Jungarian

proportion of Persian lexical items.

variety of Evenki, also known as Ongkor Solon, became extinct in the
1990s, while Dagur and Manchu are still spoken by several thousand
individuals.
Of the greatest potential significance is the presence of Manchu in
Jungaria. These Manchu-speakers are officially classified as representing
the separate ‘Sibe’ (Xibo) nationality, but, in spite of contact influences
from other local languages (Kazakh, Uyghur, Mongol and Russian), their
native language belongs to the spoken Manchu group, and they also
use written Manchu as a literary medium. As the number of Manchuspeakers elsewhere in China has declined to a handful of individuals, the
preservation of the language in Jungaria may be seen as a reserve that
could be used for linguistic reinvigoration among the rest of the ethnic
Manchu. Unfortunately, the native language is now declining also among
the ‘Sibe’, and the number of remaining speakers is likely to be below
5,000, with very few young speakers. Without active measures, Manchu
might be rapidly lost also in its last Jungarian refuge.
Before the introduction and expansion of the present-day
languages of the region, the dominant language family in large parts of
eastern Central Asia, especially in Tarimia, was Indo-European. In more
recent history, not considering the colonial impact of Russia, only the
Iranian branch has retained a marginal position in the region. Today,
Iranian is represented on the Chinese side by two Pamirian languages,
Wakhi and Sarikoli, whose speakers are officially identified as Tajiks

58

(Tajike). Wakhi is also spoken in the neighbouring countries, while Sarikoli
is confined to China. A trace of the former presence of Persian (or Tajik)

India and
the Himalayan
chain
Stuart Blackburn and Jean Robert Opgenort

India and the Himalayan chain are home to one of the most intricate
ethnolinguistic mosaics in the world. India, Nepal, Bangladesh and Sri
Lanka are dominated by Indo-Aryan languages such as Hindi, Urdu,
Bengali and Nepali, although several major Dravidian languages are
spoken in South India and parts of Sri Lanka. These official, literary
and scripted languages are not threatened. Most of the endangered
languages in the region are the 180 or so Tibeto-Burman languages
spoken by small communities clustered along the Himalayan chain,
and extending down the India–Myanmar–Bangladesh border. Several
Dravidian and a few Indo-Aryan, Austro-Asiatic and Daic languages
spoken mostly in central, eastern and north-east India are also under
threat. With a few exceptions, these endangered languages are without
official status, a literary history, a script or sufficient state support.
We have extended the list of only 17 languages reported as
under threat in this region in the second edition of this Atlas to a
total of almost 300. Of these, more than 100 have been classified as
vulnerable, almost 100 as definitely endangered, approximately two
dozen as severely endangered, 40 or so as critically endangered and 10
as extinct. However, because reliable data concerning both their health
and the number of speakers are not always available for many of the
smaller languages, our classifications should be treated as provisional. In
addition, a few languages classified as vulnerable might more accurately
be described as ‘stable but potentially endangered’, as suggested by
Krauss (2007). Most of these are languages with a comparatively large
number of speakers such as Bodo, Khasi, Tamang and Ho. For languages
beyond our own research (supplemented by that of colleagues), we have
drawn primarily on figures reported in national censuses, the Ethnologue
online database, the published work of George van Driem (1991, 2001,
2007a, 2007b) and unpublished data from Udaya Narayana Singh. These

59

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

sources are often at variance with each other, however, and the census

national identity based on Nepali. From the unification of Nepal in the

figures may sometimes appear inaccurate. For example, although Dura

late eighteenth century up to the 1990s, the government promoted

is, according to our data, extinct, the 2001 Nepalese census lists more

monolingualism and suppressed the rights of linguistic minorities. After

than 3,000 speakers.

the People’s Movement brought an end to absolute monarchy in 1990,
the new Constitution acknowledged the multilingual character of the

Nepal

country; it declared that Nepali was ‘the official language of the nation’

Nepali, the official language of Nepal, is the mother tongue of more

between these terms was not entirely clear). Article 18 of the new

than 11 million people and the lingua franca throughout the country.

Constitution also allowed communities the fundamental right to promote

Whereas the position of Nepali and three other regionally important

their own language and to use it as the medium of instruction at primary-

Indo-Aryan languages (Awadhi, Bhojpuri and Maithili) is safe, more

school level, but failed to provide any institutional support.

and that minority languages were ‘national languages’ (the distinction

than sixty other languages are at risk. Several Indo-Aryan languages

Since 1990, activists within minority communities have been freely

with a small number of speakers (Danuwar, Darai, Darma, Kumale and

promoting their languages in the media and through various campaigns

Majhi or Bote) are severely endangered because those speakers are

in order to increase cultural awareness and literacy. The new freedoms

rapidly adopting Nepali. The Dravidian language Dhangar and the

have given rise to numerous newspapers, magazines and broadcasts

Austro-Asiatic (Munda) language Satār have larger number of speakers

in minority languages. In spite of these efforts, however, activists have

but are also vulnerable.

had limited success in protecting endangered languages. Many of them

The many Tibeto-Burman languages are at various stages

are giving way to Nepali as the language of civil administration, law,

of endangerment. We list more than forty vulnerable or definitely

commerce and the media. The right to operate schools remains mostly

endangered languages, more than a dozen severely or critically

unexercised. In brief, state support for minority languages has been

endangered languages and one extinct language. The smallest and

largely symbolic.

most endangered Tibeto-Burman languages (Barām, Dumi, Hayu, Sām

Since the 2006 Democracy Movement against the monarchy

and Yakkha) have very few speakers and are on the verge of extinction.

and the adoption of an Interim Constitution in 2007, linguistic minority

Newar has around 825,500 speakers but is still endangered since it is

groups have been given additional rights to use their mother tongue in

losing out to Nepali.

local organizations and government offices. In Nepal today, there is an
ongoing debate about local autonomy and language use in areas where



60

Changing language politics

minorities are the dominant population. In the long run, this may lead to

In Nepal, reasons for the present decline of minority languages include

a Swiss-model federal system in which minority languages are used in

lack of state encouragement and the simultaneous cultivation of a

local government.

India and the Himalayan chain

Bhutan

about one dozen Tibeto-Burman languages in the western Himalayan

Dzongkha, which has a direct linguistic relationship to modern Tibetan,

languages in central and South India, about two dozen Indo-Aryan

is the official national language of Bhutan. Although it has approximately

languages in central and northern India, and, finally, a handful of Daic

160,000 speakers, it is marginalized by the extensive use of English

languages in the north-eastern state of Assam.

states of Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand, nearly two dozen Dravidian

throughout Bhutan and by Nepali, which is spoken in much of the south

The reasons for language decline and possible extinction are

of the country. The official newspaper, Kuensel, publishes Dzongkha-,

not linguistic. These languages are not falling away because they lack a

Nepali- and English-language versions.

complex grammar or an extensive vocabulary. They are in decline because

None of the several Tibeto-Burman languages in Bhutan is

they are unfashionable and are not transmitted at home, have limited

considered to be safe. Although the sociolinguistic situation in Bhutan

state support and are not taught at school. In India, where languages and

is more stable than in Nepal, all languages are threatened, and the use

scripts underpin regional identities and political power, these unofficial

of the mother tongue among minority populations is declining. We list

and unscripted languages are at a distinct disadvantage.

half the native languages as vulnerable and the other half as definitely
endangered. All but two languages have fewer than 40,000 speakers.



According to van Driem (2007a, p. 294), Lhokpu is ‘the most endangered

Languages gain ‘official’ status only when included in the 8th Schedule

language in Bhutan, which is threatened by linguistic assimilation to the

of the Indian Constitution. When the Constitution was first adopted in

surrounding communities of Nepali colonists in southwestern Bhutan’,

1950, it listed fourteen official languages, and eight more have since

and ‘the least endangered language in Bhutan is the Tshangla or

been added. However, the only endangered languages to be granted

Shâchop language’.

this official status are Meithei (Manipuri) and Bodo. Meithei is atypical

Intervention policy

since it is a mixture of Tibeto-Burman and Indic, with a literature once

India

written in its own (now lost) script and in Devanagari (Bengali version)

Endangered languages are spoken in every state in India, but they

compromise to end an insurgency in Assam.

from about 1700. Bodo was approved in 2003, as part of a political

cluster in two main regions – north-east and central-east India – where

Government support for endangered languages could be

‘tribal’ populations dominate. Of the 170 or so languages under threat,

further developed at the level of individual states, which is crucial since

more than half are Tibeto-Burman languages in north-east India (mostly

states determine the medium of instruction and language use in local

in Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland) that are reported in this Atlas for

government. By law, several endangered languages are approved for

the first time. Other endangered languages include two dozen Austro-

use in state (or district-level) schools, but few are regularly heard in the

Asiatic languages spoken in eastern India and the Nicobar Islands,

classroom. While most of the large, vulnerable languages are taught at

61

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

school, the great majority of them do not enjoy even this modest status

1987. Assamese had been the medium of instruction until the 1970s,

in their own communities.

but current official policy is that English should be used at all levels of

Indian states are free to adopt one or more languages as
the official language(s), and several in the north-east have chosen

education. In practice, however, Hindi dominates in schools, as it does
in government offices.

a vulnerable language spoken by a large percentage of the state’s

62

population as one of their official languages (Meithei in Manipur, Bodo



in Assam, Kokborok in Tripura, Mizo in Mizoram, Garo and Khasi in

Another crippling fact for most of India’s threatened languages is that

Meghalaya). The extensive linguistic diversity in Nagaland and Arunachal

they lack a viable script. While scripts have been invented (rediscovered

Pradesh has produced a different situation. No single local language is

and revived) for several languages, very few are used with any regularity in

spoken by a sufficiently large percentage of the population to make it

schools or public life. Many of these languages appear in print (in Roman,

acceptable as an official state language. As a result, English alone is the

Devanagari or an invented script) as Christian prayer-books and biblical

official language in Nagaland and Hindi enjoys that status in Arunachal

translations, particularly in the north-east; and this usage may prove to be a

Pradesh. These decisions also reflect a desire to claim a cultural identity

lifeline for them. Some threatened languages also appear in the classroom,

independent of Assam/India/Hinduism. In Nagaland, some Naga

but they are typically pushed aside in favour of English- and Hindi-language

languages are taught at school, but mostly in rural areas. A lingua franca,

schoolbooks printed in the Latin and Devanagari alphabets.

Lack of a script

Nagamese, is widely used in urban contexts where speakers of mutually

Lack of a script does not necessarily mean illiteracy. Figures for

unintelligible languages mix together. However, because Nagamese is a

literacy can be misleading, however, because, first, the Indian census

pidgin, deriving mostly from Assamese and Hindi, some people see it as

reports the ability to read and write in any language and, second, such

representing an unwelcome degree of Indian influence. English, which is

ability is self-reported and not tested. Thus, the 2001 literacy rates for

often part of the Christian Naga identity, is thus the default position.

north-east India are impressive: 88 per cent for Mizoram; over 65 per

In Arunachal Pradesh, about two-thirds of the total population

cent for Meghalaya, Nagaland and Manipur; 55 per cent for Arunachal

of just over 1 million people are mother-tongue speakers of one of

Pradesh; and 65 per cent for India as a whole. But they actually reflect

approximately thirty endangered languages, all of which are Tibeto-

competence in Hindi (and/or English and/or Bengali), while speakers of

Burman (with the exception of Khampti, which is Daic). The other third

endangered languages remain illiterate in their mother tongues.

of the state’s population are recent immigrants whose mother tongue is

Another, poorly studied, dimension of endangerment in India

an Indo-Aryan language (mostly Hindi, Bengali or Assamese) and who

is that loss occurs in stages, as different varieties of speech within that

work as civil servants, businesspeople, shopkeepers and labourers. With

language disappear. Since most threatened languages in the region

Christian conversions and English-language education far less advanced

are spoken by people who practise (or practised) some form of a local

than in Nagaland, Hindi was chosen as the state’s official language in

religion other than (but usually mixed with) Hinduism, Buddhism or (now)

India and the Himalayan chain

Christianity, many of these languages have a speech variety used by

about 25 per cent speak Tamil, a dialect of the language spoken in

ritual specialists to address spirits. Defined by its esoteric vocabulary,

South India. A very small population (estimated at around 300) speaks

rather than grammar, this ritual speech (or oral poetry) is usually the

the endangered language of Vedda, itself related to Sinhala, but it may

first level of language to disappear. A second vulnerable speech variety

be extinct within a decade.

is that used in traditional storytelling because it relies on allusions and
tropes, characters and ideas, which belong to a mythic world that is
replaced by modernization.

Conclusion
The threat to many vulnerable languages in India and the Himalayan

Bangladesh

chain is difficult to judge. In many cases, intergenerational transmission

According to the Ethnologue report for Bangladesh, the country is home

it among themselves and to others most of the time. At school and

to thirty-nine languages, including several varieties of Bengali. With

through the media, however, they also learn Hindi, Nepali, English, Tamil

more than 200 million speakers, Bengali (Bangla) is the primary language

(or another dominant regional language); and some children sometimes

spoken in Bangladesh as well as the national and official language. Most

speak these languages among themselves and with outsiders. A few

minority languages belong to the Tibeto-Burman language family and are

children, mostly in elite families, use one of these dominant languages at

spoken in the India–Myanmar–Bangladesh borderlands. These linguistic

home, but not exclusively. Even when the mother tongue is still spoken

communities are largely concentrated in eastern India or Myanmar,

fairly widely, it is usually marginalized in the bi- and trilingualism that

although a significant number of speakers also live in Bangladesh.

is the norm throughout the subcontinent, especially among mother-

Sak and Mru are two severely endangered languages spoken in

is healthy. The majority of children learn their mother tongue and speak

tongue speakers of endangered languages.

the Chittagong Hill tracts of south-east Bangladesh. The Sak people are

Most of these vulnerable languages will probably survive, and will

ethnically related to the Chakma, who now speak a distinctive kind of

continue to be learned by the majority of children as their mother tongue,

Bengali. The ways of life and cultures of many of the Tibeto-Burman groups

for several decades into the future. Others, however, will surely decline,

in the Chittagong Hill tracts have been under threat for several decades.

some will hover near extinction and a few will have disappeared by 2100.
People who speak many of these threatened languages in India

Sri Lanka

and the Himalayan chain tell a story about how they once had, but

Of the major nations in the region, Sri Lanka is the least heterogeneous

and dominant neighbours). It is not at all certain, however, that their

linguistically. Approximately 70 per cent of its 13 million population

grandchildren will command enough of their mother tongue to tell the

speak Sinhala (closely related to Indo-Aryan languages in India), while

story of their own language loss in the future.

then lost, a script (in order to explain away their illiteracy amid literate

63

South-East
Asia, southern
China and
Taiwan (China)
David Bradley

South-East Asia
This section gives a brief description of the distribution and linguistic
relationships of the endangered and some recently extinct languages
of the various nations of South-East Asia. Brunei Darussalam is not
discussed as it has no indigenous endangered languages. Many of the
languages described here are also found in the surrounding areas –
Bangladesh, India, China and Indonesia – in some cases, often referred
to by other names.
Most of the countries in this area have recognized the rights of
their indigenous minority groups, and some have carried out formal
classification of these groups, such as the 54 ethnic groups of Viet
Nam, the 49 ethnic groups of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
(PDR) according to the 2002 classification, and the 135 ethnic groups
of Myanmar. In others such as Thailand there is a gradually growing list
of recognized ethnic groups. Naturally, there are some inconsistencies
between the classifications used in different countries. For example,
there is a greater tendency to recognize small distinct groups in Viet
Nam than in neighbouring China, which means that different languages
and groups may be lumped together with one or more others within
a national minority of China, but recognized as distinct ethnic groups
in Viet Nam. However, the official classifications are not able to reflect
the extreme linguistic complexity in the field, and in many cases the
groups with the smallest and most vulnerable languages are not given
separate ethnic group status, sometimes explicitly because of their small
populations.
Language stocks represented in the area include Austro-Asiatic
or more specifically Mon-Khmer, Sino-Tibetan including primarily TibetoBurman, and Austro-Thai including Austronesian and Thai-Kadai. Some

South-East Asia, southern China and Taiwan (China)

scholars include Hmong-Mien (Miao-Yao) within Austro-Thai, but others



prefer to regard this as a separate stock. There are also some creoles with

Of the endangered languages of the Lao PDR identified here, most

European lexicon, as well as various languages of wider communication

are only at the stage of being definitely endangered, and many more

from outside the area. Among the endangered languages, the Austro-

currently relatively safe languages have very small speaker populations.

Asiatic languages form the largest proportion, but there are some from

There is one critically endangered language, Iduh (also spoken in Viet

every stock.1

Nam), and there are two severely endangered languages, Arem and

The Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Bana. About two dozen languages are definitely endangered, and three



Cambodia

Cambodia has twenty indigenous languages, according to the sixteenth

more, the Thai-Kadai languages Tai Daeng and Tai Neua and the
Tibeto-Burman language Phunoi, are vulnerable.

edition of the Ethnologue (Lewis, 2009). This includes the Austronesian

Of the Tibeto-Burman languages, Bana is the most endangered

Western Cham and Jarai languages and the Thai-Kadai Lao language

and Phunoi is the least. Akeu and Sila are definitely endangered; the

in the north-east, and a wide variety of Austro-Asiatic languages from

former is also spoken in Thailand, Myanmar and China, while the latter is

different subgroups including Pearic, Khmer, Vietic, Bahnaric and

also spoken in Viet Nam. The dialect differences within Phunoi are very

Katuic.

great, with one dialect, Laopan, being fairly similar to Bisu of Thailand,
Even Western Cham with its large population is vulnerable; the

language is distinct from Eastern Cham as spoken in Viet Nam, whence

Myanmar and China, and other dialects being more similar to Côông of
Viet Nam or Sangkong of China.

Western Cham came in the seventeenth century. There is also one

The Austro-Asiatic languages fall into various subgroups, especially

Western Cham village embedded in central Bangkok, the speakers

Vietic in the south with a dozen languages, but also representing Katuic,

brought from Cambodia as silk weavers in the mid-nineteenth century;

Bahnaric, Khmuic and Angkuic branches, with most of these languages

they retain their Islamic faith and their professional skills, but have lost

(other than Arem, as noted above) definitely endangered. Several of the

their language.

Vietic languages are also spoken in nearby Viet Nam, as is Khmuic Iduh;
Mlabri is also spoken in Thailand, Pasing also in China, while Mok is also
spoken in Thailand, Myanmar and China.

1.

Much of the data for this discussion and listing are drawn from Bradley
(2007a, 2007b, 2007c) and Wurm (2007a, 2007b), as well as from more recent
fieldwork by myself and by colleagues and students. I would specifically like
to acknowledge the assistance of Gérard Diffloth, Jamin Pelkey and Suwilai
Premsrirat, as well as those already acknowledged in my earlier publications
on this topic. Naturally, they are not responsible for any errors that I may
have introduced in my analysis of their data.

The endangered Thai-Kadai language Saek is also spoken in
Thailand, where it is severely endangered; Tai Neua is also spoken in
Viet Nam. A large number of small localized varieties of other Thai-Kadai
languages of the eastern Lao PDR and Austro-Asiatic languages in the
southern Lao PDR could also be classified as vulnerable, or becoming so.
As education and communications in the Lao PDR improve, the language

65

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

endangerment situation for all minority groups may be expected to

The majority of the endangered languages of peninsular

worsen, especially as the government is focusing on education in Lao,

Malaysia, including many not listed here as they have been extinct for

the national language.

a fairly long time, are those of the indigenous Negrito groups speaking
Austro-Asiatic Aslian languages. The term Aslian comes from the Malay



Malaysia

expression Orang Asli (‘original people’), which is the official term for

Malaysia has a great deal of linguistic diversity. In the East Malaysian states

these groups. However, all their languages or language clusters have

of Sarawak and Sabah, all the indigenous languages are Austronesian,

contracted greatly, losing dialects and territory, and are continuing to do

and many are under increasing pressure from genetically related Malay,

so. Many more may soon become severely endangered or worse. Two of

the national language. This includes many larger groups not listed here

these languages are also spoken in adjacent areas of Thailand.

as endangered, but whose languages have been losing domains of use

Malaysia also has one indigenous Portuguese-based creole

and tend to have fewer younger community members who can speak

spoken in Melaka (formerly known as Malacca), which has persisted from

them well.

the initial Portuguese colonial period through the Dutch and British

Four languages of East Malaysia are listed here as endangered,

periods and since independence. Although it is now recognized as an

following Wurm (2007a, 2007b); one could list many more groups with

indigenous language of Malaysia, it is severely endangered, with only a

small populations whose languages will probably soon be endangered.

part of the community, mainly older adults, still able to speak it.

In some cases, local communities are already undertaking language
revival efforts, as they are aware of this imminent danger.

66



Myanmar

The languages of peninsular Malaysia include one extinct

Myanmar lacks up-to-date documentation on the language situation.

language, Kenaboi, whose classification is a matter of controversy, as

The last adequate census was in 1931, the government classification of

well as a few groups with distinctive endangered Malay languages. Some

135 ethnic groups is somewhat questionable, and the current situation is

of these overlap into nearby countries, such as severely endangered

not conducive to field research, especially among the ethnic minorities.

Orang Seletar whose speakers also live in Singapore and Indonesia,

Three of the endangered Tibeto-Burman languages, Chawte, Mru

and definitely endangered Urak Lawoi’ whose speakers also live in

and Sak, overlap into Bangadesh and/or India. Tibeto-Burman Akeu and

Thailand. Others are indigenous groups who have probably switched

Austro-Asiatic Mok are also found in Thailand, the Lao PDR and China.

from speaking Austro-Asiatic Aslian languages to speaking Malay

Of the remaining Tibeto-Burman languages, Bisu is also spoken in China

languages, such as extinct Orang Kanaq, severely endangered Temuan

and Thailand, Anung and Laomian are also spoken in China, and the

and definitely endangered Orang Hulu. All of these Malay languages are

rest are only spoken in Myanmar. The Austronesian language Moklen is

under severe pressure from local and standard Malay varieties, which are

also spoken in Thailand as is the Austro-Asiatic language Mon, while the

in the process of supplanting them.

Austro-Asiatic language Danaw is only spoken in Myanmar.

South-East Asia, southern China and Taiwan (China)

Standard Burmese is spreading at the expense of most other



Singapore

indigenous languages, though less rapidly than the national languages

Singapore has four official languages, Mandarin Chinese, English, Malay

of many surrounding countries.

and Tamil. The rapid spread of Mandarin started in 1979 with a ‘Speak
Mandarin’ campaign, which has been so successful that all of the various



The Philippines

non-Mandarin Chinese varieties spoken in Singapore, which were the

The indigenous languages of the Philippines are all Austronesian

mother tongues of about two-thirds of all Singaporeans at that time,

languages; there were also some Spanish-based creoles that developed

are in rapid decline and are now endangered to a substantial degree,

during the Spanish colonial period, most of which are now extinct but

though of course they survive in China and elsewhere.

one of which, Chavacano, is very vigorous, mainly in the south of the
country.

Malay persists in Singapore, but primarily among the Malay
ethnic group, and it is not the primary language for many younger

Of the many Austronesian languages, according to Wurm

Malays. There is also a very small Orang Seletar community in the north-

(2007a, 2007b) at least thirteen have 500 or fewer speakers. Other

west of the island, but this language is severely endangered here, as in

languages are vulnerable, with slightly larger speaker numbers. There

Malaysia and Indonesia.

are many more small languages that may become endangered as the

The Tamil group is shifting to English, though of course Tamil

national language, Pilipino, based on Tagalog, as well as major regional

is still extremely vital in India. Other smaller groups from India are

languages, spread.

also undergoing language shift to English away from languages such

Thirteen of the endangered and extinct Austronesian languages

as Malayalam, Telugu and Punjabi. The language that is gaining both

are or were spoken by small groups of Negritos, using related language

in proportion of use and in speaker numbers is Singapore English, a

names such as Agta, Alta, Arta, Ayta, Atta or Ata; these are further

distinctive New English widely used by nearly everyone in Singapore

specified according to where they are spoken. Similar languages in other

even if not officially encouraged.

places, some using exactly the same names, are less endangered; and
some others are long extinct. These Negrito populations, scattered across



the northern and central Philippines, are the original indigenous peoples

(With Suwilai Premsrirat, Mahidol University, Thailand)

whose languages were replaced by those of incoming Austronesian-

Thailand has seventy indigenous languages, belonging to various

speaking groups when they came from the north, probably several

linguistic groups: Austro-Asiatic and Thai-Kadai in many areas, Hmong-

millennia ago.

Mien (Miao-Yao) and Tibeto-Burman mainly in the north and Austronesian

One definitely endangered language, Batak, has the same name
as a large cluster of languages in Sumatra, Indonesia, but is not related
to those languages other than also being Austronesian.

Thailand

mainly in the south.
The languages of the Austro-Asiatic group include extinct
Phalok, three critically endangered languages, four severely endangered

67

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

languages and six definitely endangered languages. These fall into

elsewhere – Bisu in Myanmar and China, and Akeu in Myanmar, the Lao

many different major subgroups of Austro-Asiatic, including Aslian in the

PDR and China.

south, Pearic in the east, Vietic in the north-east, Monic in the central

Some of the endangered languages of Thailand are in small

region and Khmuic, Angkuic and Palaungic in the north. The Mon

isolated populations brought from elsewhere by the Thai kings over

language was the traditional language of the Dvaravati and some other

the centuries. They include the one severely endangered Thai-Kadai

Mon kingdoms of central Thailand, but has been replaced there by Thai

language of Thailand, Saek, and two of the Tibeto-Burman languages,

over the last millennium. The remnants of this language survive in the

severely endangered Mpi and definitely endangered Bisu. Other similar

hills between central and north-east Thailand, under the name Nyahkur.

enclave groups also tend to lose their languages over time, but the

Other Mon came from Myanmar at various times in the nineteenth

languages may survive elsewhere; for example, the Lao Song of Thailand

century and settled around Bangkok; in Thailand their distinctive Mon

are Tai Dam from what is now north-west Viet Nam, and are losing their

varieties from Myanmar are severely endangered, much more so than

language to varying degrees across Thailand, but the language survives

the same language is in Myanmar.

well in Viet Nam.

Some of these languages, like many other Austro-Asiatic

68

languages, are found in the remote border areas of several countries.



For example, the Mok are widely scattered in the north-western Lao

As noted above, Viet Nam has a fairly liberal policy as regards granting

PDR, northern Thailand, north-east Myanmar and the far south-west of

official ethnic group status even to fairly small groups, but this is an ethnic

China; the Mlabri and Thavung live in both Thailand and the Lao PDR;

classification rather than a linguistic one, and it has not extended to every

several Pearic groups live in Thailand and Cambodia; some of the Aslian

one of the smallest groups whose languages are most endangered.

groups of Thailand also live in Malaysia; and the Mon-speakers, as noted

Of the endangered languages listed for Viet Nam, three are critically

above, now live mainly in Myanmar.

endangered: Austro-Asiatic Iduh and two of the three Thai-Kadai Gelao

Viet Nam

The two Austronesian languages of the south are definitely

languages, Green Gelao and Red Gelao. Three more are severely

endangered Moklen and Urak Lawoi’. These are both spoken by

endangered: White Gelao as well as Austro-Asiatic Khang Quang Lam

populations of what are sometimes called Sea Gypsies in English, Chao

and Arem. Another seventeen are definitely endangered, with six more

Thalay (‘sea people’) in Thai, Saloun in Burmese and Orang Laut (‘sea

vulnerable. Further, the Kolao ethnic group includes the three Gelao

people’) in Malaysia. Moklen is also spoken in Myanmar, and Urak Lawoi’

groups, the Chut ethnic group includes a total of six groups with closely

is also spoken in Malaysia.

related Vietic languages, and the Thai ethnic group comprises the two

Of the four Tibeto-Burman languages that are endangered in

Tai languages Tai Daeng and Tai Neua, as well as various other related

Thailand, two are spoken only in Thailand, severely endangered Gong

languages further north. The Iduh are listed in the Vietnamese ethnic

and Mpi. Two others, definitely endangered Bisu and Akeu, are spoken

classification as O-du; another Austro-Asiatic group, Khang Quang Lam,

South-East Asia, southern China and Taiwan (China)

speaks one of several languages included together in the Khang ethnic

maintained in China, it is not given separate national minority status

group; two Tibeto-Burman groups can loosely fit into the Phula ethnic

there, unlike in Viet Nam.

group; and the Nung Ven speak a language closely related to Gelao.
In spite of Viet Nam’s successful classification system and its policy



Conclusion

of support for ethnic minorities, its language maintenance programme

Overall, we may expect that large numbers of additional small languages

has not been systematic. This may be changing, as new educational

in this region will soon move into one of the endangered categories, and

initiatives towards mother-tongue schooling are under way.

most of those already at some stage in the process of language shift

Of the six Tibeto-Burman languages, vulnerable Côông is very

may continue to move in that direction. Most of the critically or severely

similar to Phunoi of the Lao PDR, and the Sila or Sida of Viet Nam and

endangered languages may be expected to disappear, even if language

the Lao PDR speak the same definitely endangered language. Definitely

maintenance efforts start now. As is well known (Bradley, 2002), attitudes

endangered Cosung is also spoken in China, where speakers are included

and motivation are the principal factors in the survival of languages, and

in the Lahu nationality along with those of at least four other languages;

the conditions in much of this area are not favourable at present.

the Cosung ethnic group of Viet Nam is sometimes also called La Hu,

On the other hand, there are some promising examples of

according to the group’s own name for itself. Definitely endangered

community-based language maintenance efforts, such as among the

Laghuu, Mo’ang and Phula are all also spoken in nearby China, where

Bisu community in Thailand (Person, 2005) and the Gong, Thavung

some of them are less endangered.

and Chong communities also in Thailand, under the leadership of local

Of the endangered Austro-Asiatic languages, seven are Vietic,

scholars such as Professor Suwilai Premsrirat, who also contributed data

one is Bahnaric, two are Khmuic, and Mang is part of the recently

on Thailand for the relevant section in the present chapter. Government

proposed Mang or Pakanic subgroup. Some of the Vietic languages are

efforts through schools are also starting in Viet Nam and elsewhere.

also spoken in the nearby Lao PDR, as is Iduh; Mang is also spoken in
China. Viet Nam is particularly rich in Thai-Kadai languages of the Kadai
subgroup (it has seven), three of which are also spoken in China which

Southern China

is their original homeland. However, all three are better maintained in

The southern part of China has a very large number of endangered

Viet Nam, although they are critically or severely endangered there as

languages. These fall into four main genetic stocks: the Tibeto-Burman

well. The Austronesian languages include definitely endangered Eastern

part of Sino-Tibetan, with Sinitic (Chinese) being the other part; the Austro-

Cham and vulnerable Chru. Finally, there is one Hmong-Mien language,

Thai stock, including its components Thai-Kadai and Austronesian; the

Baheng, which is potentially endangered in China but probably somewhat

Hmong-Mien (Miao-Yao) stock, which some scholars prefer to include as

more so in Viet Nam, where its speakers are classified as members of

a third part of Austro-Thai; and the Mon-Khmer part of the Austro-Asiatic

the Pà Then ethnic group. Interestingly, though this language is better

stock. There are also two contact languages: one critically endangered

69

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Portuguese creole spoken in Macao, and one possible mixed language

Some other endangered Tibeto-Burman languages of northeast India also overlap into south-east Tibet, but most of their speaker

spoken in Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region.
Many Sinitic varieties have been losing speakers and domains

populations are much larger in India. The only overlapping language

of use since 1950, while the national standard language Putonghua

that has more speakers in China than in India is the recently located

(‘common speech’), based on Northern Mandarin, has been spreading

Zaiwa, Zha, Meyol or Zakhring language, with 700 speakers in China

rapidly. This may eventually mean that the extremely distinct local

and 300 in India (Jacquesson, 2001).

varieties of Chinese in the south-east will become endangered, starting

Most of the groups speaking languages of the Qiangic

from some cities. For example, this process has begun in Shanghai, but is

subgroup of Tibeto-Burman are classified as members of the Tibetan

less advanced in Guangzhou and much less so in Hong Kong. Putonghua

national minority and live in western Sichuan Province. This includes

and/or some other local Chinese variety is also usually the language that

some non-endangered languages as well as vulnerable or definitely

2

is replacing the endangered languages of southern China.

endangered Choyo, Ersu, Guichong, Muya, Zhaba, Shixing and
Namuyi.



Tibeto-Burman

The Tujia national minority has two languages spoken in the

The Tibeto-Burman languages of China include many that are not

south-west of Hunan Province, Northern Tujia or Biji and Southern

endangered, some with very large speaker populations. Some of these

Tujia or Mozi; both are severely endangered, and spoken only by

have decreasing proportions of the community who can speak their

a very small part of the Tujia population in very restricted areas

traditional language, and several dialects are disappearing or have

(for more details, see Brassett and Brassett, 2005). Both may soon

disappeared, for example among the Qiang national minority.

become critically endangered as very few children are now using

Of the Bodic (Tibetan and closely related) languages of China,

them. The Bai national minority is concentrated in the west of Yunnan

two endangered languages are spoken both in south-east Tibet and in

Province, and all the languages and dialects they speak are in decline.

adjacent areas of India and Bhutan; these are Cuona Menba and Motuo

The most endangered language within the Bai national minority is

Menba. Another vulnerable Bodic language, Baima, is spoken in south-

severely endangered Laemae, Lama or Northern Bai. Of the Nungish

west Gansu Province and in nearby north-west Sichuan Province.

languages, the Anung language of part of the Nu national minority
is critically endangered in China, but only severely endangered in
Myanmar.

2.

70

The principal sources used for this section are Bradley (2007a, 2007b, 2007c)
and Shearer and Sun (2002). I have also used recent field data of my own,
and am very glad to acknowledge recent information from Sun Hongkai
and from Jamin Pelkey, as well as a draft version of the China section of the
Ethnologue (Lewis, 2009), which is however not yet available for citation.

The majority of the endangered Tibeto-Burman languages
of southern China are Ngwi languages. Ngwi is called Yi Branch in
Chinese, and was formerly called Loloish in English; a blended form
Yipho is also sometimes seen. These form one component of the

South-East Asia, southern China and Taiwan (China)

Burmic, Burmese-Lolo or Lolo-Burmese subfamily, along with Burmish.

including Pupeo (also spoken in Viet Nam), Laji (which is similar but

Among the Burmish languages of China, two are endangered,

not identical to Lachi as spoken in Viet Nam) and Buyang, Mulao and

Chintaw critically and Bola definitely. Among the Ngwi languages,

Yerong. Mulao should not be confused with the much larger Mulam

many languages or clusters of languages are endangered, at levels

group whose Kam-Sui language is only vulnerable. Qaw has become

ranging from potential to critical. The degree of endangerment often

extinct fairly recently; some other Kadai languages have been extinct

differs from place to place; for example, the Sanie language just west

for much longer, and the vast majority of the members of the Gelao

of Kunming is now critically endangered in some villages, severely

nationality do not speak any kind of Gelao language. Several of these

endangered in others and only definitely endangered in some others

languages are somewhat better maintained in Viet Nam, where they

(Bradley, 2005).

are relatively recent migrants, than in the original territory of western

Depending on how they are broken up, there may be far more

Guizhou Province.

distinct endangered languages here; for example, Pelkey (2005) reports

The endangered Kam-Tai languages include those of three

twenty-one languages within what is here classified into the three

small groups not recognized as separate national minorities, Lajia,

South-eastern Ngwi languages Phula, Muji and Mo’ang, all considered

Mak and Rao, and two that are recognized, Maonan and Mulam, the

by Chinese linguists to form part of the south-eastern dialect of the Yi

latter usually cited in official sources as Mulao but not to be confused

language along with non-endangered Sani, Axi, Azhe and Azha. Phula

with the Kadai language, Mulao. In addition, many of the smaller

and Mo’ang, as well as related Laghuu, are also spoken in Viet Nam. In

subdialects and dialects of languages in southern China within Thai or

a recent work, Pelkey (2007) classifies these into even more languages,

Tai proper are also in decline.
While there are many endangered Austronesian languages

based on recent detailed survey fieldwork.

spoken in Taiwan, the only such language of China is Utsat or Tsat of



Austro-Thai

Hainan Island, whose Chamic language, related to the Chamic languages

The Thai-Kadai stock within Austro-Thai is usually divided into Kadai

of southern Viet Nam, is definitely endangered. As its speakers are

and Kam-Tai major subgroups. Zhuang-Dong is the usual term used

Muslim, they have been classified in the Hui or Muslim nationality of

for Kam-Tai in China; the Kam-Sui subgroup is known as Dong, the

China, and are also sometimes called Huihui in Chinese sources.

Chinese name for the Kam, in China.
The Thai-Kadai endangered languages of southern China



Hmong-Mien (Miao-Yao)

include eight Kadai languages, all severely or critically endangered.

All Chinese sources and older foreign sources refer to this group as

Three are spoken by people classified within the Gelao national

Miao-Yao, following the Chinese names for the two large language

minority (all of them are also spoken in Viet Nam), as well as five

clusters that it includes. Hmong-Mien is based on the autonyms of two

other languages classified within various other national minorities,

large groups from within these two language clusters who also live in

71

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

South-East Asia, especially in Viet Nam and the Lao PDR but also in

probably disappeared there at least twenty years ago. This creole is

Thailand. The endangered languages from within this group are in two

being supported by community activity, but the last speakers are now

other subgroups: the Bunu languages, all included within the Yao national

quite old and most remaining community members speak decreolized

minority along with the Yao languages, with some non-endangered

Portuguese instead.

languages as well as five that are endangered, including one, Baheng,

Shearer and Sun (2002, p. 268) briefly discuss Wuse or E speech.

also spoken in Viet Nam. The most critically endangered Hmong-Mien

Foreign scholars have suggested that this is a Thai-Kadai language with

language is the She language, spoken in Guangdong Province in two

very extensive lexical and phonological influence from a local Cantonese

areas by a tiny proportion of the rather large population of the She

Chinese variety, but Chinese scholars regard it as a mixed language

national minority.

with Chinese as well as Tai-Kadai components from three surrounding
languages. Whatever its origin, it is vulnerable.



Austro-Asiatic

All the Austro-Asiatic languages of China are in the Mon-Khmer subgroup.



They include various non-endangered languages in the Wa and De’ang

The definition of what constitutes a separate language is a major issue

national minorities, some of the languages in the Bulang national minority,

in classifying the languages of southern China; Chinese linguists tend

and the dialect of Vietnamese spoken by members of the Jing national

to classify as dialects what would be regarded as separate languages

minority. The definitely endangered languages are some of the Angkuic

elsewhere. Another important issue is the lack of complete surveys of

languages whose speakers are classified within the Bulang national

some areas in the south-west of the country. Chinese linguists have

minority, Hu and Mok, both also spoken in one or more countries of South-

been doing extensive and excellent work for many years, but most of

East Asia. Another three languages form a recently proposed subgroup

them concentrate on the official languages of the fifty-five recognized

within Mon-Khmer now called Pakanic. This includes definitely endangered

national minorities. For these reasons, the information here is unlikely to

Pakan and severely endangered Paliu and Mang; the last is also spoken in

be complete and will almost certainly need to be revised when further

Viet Nam. The Pakanic languages are the north-easternmost languages of

information becomes available.

the entire Mon-Khmer and Austro-Asiatic group.

Conclusion

It is also likely that the degree of endangerment of most of
the languages listed will continue to increase. In 1982 the two Tujia



72

Creoles and mixed languages

languages were reported to have over 170,000 speakers, but by 2000

There is one critically endangered creole Portuguese variety still spoken

this had decreased by nearly two-thirds to 70,000 and it is continuing

in Macao, though most of its speaker population moved to Portugal

to decrease. A similar picture is found elsewhere, and the process is

prior to the return of Macao to China in December 1999. It was formerly

accelerating with improvements in education and communications, and

also spoken by some of the Macanese community in Hong Kong, but

economic progress.

South-East Asia, southern China and Taiwan (China)

Taiwan (China)

from the name of a major tourist attraction in the area where Seediq is
spoken.3

The indigenous languages of Taiwan are all Austronesian, and represent
the maximum internal genetic diversity within Austronesian, with nine
major subgroups, including one, Yami (an exonym) or Tao (the group
autonym) of Lanyu or Orchid Island, which is more closely related to
languages further south in the Philippines and to the rest of Austronesian.
Thus Taiwan is presumably the origin point of all Austronesian languages.
The majority language is now Southern Min Chinese, sometimes called
Taiwanese, with substantial numbers of Hakka and since 1945 a number
of speakers of other varieties of Chinese. The official language is
Mandarin Chinese.
Until the Japanese colonial period (1895–1945), most of the
indigenous languages of the mountains and east coast survived fairly
well, while those of the west coast were being replaced by varieties
of Chinese. During the Japanese period, a language tip started; since
then, various languages have become extinct and all others have
become endangered. Six are now critically endangered, with speaker
numbers from one (Pazeh) down in the low twenties. All the other
surviving languages are definitely endangered and in rapid decline in
most areas, with child speakers only in a few areas, even for the largest
languages. All may well be extinct during this century if current trends
continue.
Official figures for ethnic group populations are extremely
accurate, but they may not accurately reflect speaker numbers because
communities receive special benefits if they report that the local language
is still spoken. One group, the Taroko or Seediq, has recently officially
separated from another, the Atayal, and its speakers claim that they
do not understand Atayal. Taroko is a new name for Seediq, derived

3.

I am grateful to Paul Li, Henry Chang, Elisabeth Zeitoun, Victoria Rau, Rik de
Busser and Pan Chia-jung for information about these languages, but I am
solely responsible for any errors in interpreting their input.

73

Greater
Pacific area
Darrell T. Tryon

The Greater Pacific area comprises Japan, Taiwan (China), the Philippines,
insular Malaysia, Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands,
Vanuatu, Fiji, Micronesia, Polynesia, Australia and New Zealand, as well
as Hawaii. Over 2,000 living languages, about a third of all those in the
world, are located in this area. At the same time, the Greater Pacific has,
until recently, been the area least affected by language endangerment,
with the exception of Australia, New Caledonia and Taiwan. However,
this situation has deteriorated over the last three decades, although it
is still better than in most other parts of the world. In general, the total
number of threatened languages in the Greater Pacific area excluding
Australia is over 300, and about 50 have recently become extinct (details
for the various regions are given below).

Language overview
The indigenous languages of the Greater Pacific area belong almost
exclusively to three quite different groups. The largest category is the
group of approximately 1,200 Austronesian languages that extend from
Taiwan, across the Philippines, insular Malaysia, most of Indonesia, many
coastal areas of Papua New Guinea, most of the Solomon Islands and
all of Vanuatu, New Caledonia, Fiji, Micronesia and Polynesia. These
languages are all interrelated and form the largest language family in the
world. They are subdivided into nine higher-order subgroups in Taiwan,
and one huge group, called Malayo-Polynesian, that occupies all the
other Austronesian language areas.
The second largest group, comprising more than 750 languages,
is the so-called family of Papuan languages, which occupy most of Irian
Jaya (West Papua), Papua New Guinea, Timor Leste, the northern part
of the Halmahera Islands, some parts of West Timor and some large

Greater Pacific area

islands to the west of Timor. There are also a few Papuan languages in

from their home island in search of a better economic future. In fact, in

the Solomon Islands. The Papuan languages do not form a single group

most of the Greater Pacific it is not so much the number of speakers

of interrelated languages, but there is one very large group of nearly

of a language that determines language endangerment, but rather the

500 related languages, the Trans New Guinea family, which occupies

move away from one’s home area to an urban centre. Of course, in the

much of the island of New Guinea and the Timor area; other major but

South Pacific the phenomenon of diaspora is also having a major impact,

separate groups of Papuan languages are located in north-east Papua

as more than half of all Polynesians live and work away from their home

New Guinea, in the northern three-quarters of the Bird’s Head peninsula

islands in neighbouring countries where they now reside more or less

of Irian Jaya and in northern Halmahera; another group is situated

permanently. However, this diaspora is by no means limited to the South

in eastern non-peninsular Irian Jaya. The remaining putative Papuan

Pacific.

languages belong to a number of small, unrelated groups.
The third group includes the interrelated Australian Aboriginal



Language policies and revitalization

languages, which belong to a single very large Australian family. The

There have been significant changes in language policies throughout

major subgroup, Pama-Nyungan, occupies seven-eighths of Australia,

the region in the past decade or two. In Taiwan, for example, where

with about twenty small related families in Arnhem Land (the northern

previously the minority indigenous Austronesian languages were

Australian peninsula area) and in areas to the south-east of it. The long-

severely threatened, today significant funding is allocated to their study

extinct languages of Tasmania may or may not be related to Australian

and preservation, much of it brokered through the Academia Sinica in

languages; the evidence is inconclusive.

Taipei. In Indonesia the National Language Centre (Pusat Bahasa), whose
main role has been to promote and develop the national language,



Language endangerment

Language endangerment in the Greater Pacific area is a very real concern

Indonesian, has also been a major force for the study and preservation
of many local vernaculars.

in the face of globalization and rapidly increasing access to the electronic

In the South Pacific, there have been major developments too,

media. Because of this, the major world languages, especially English,

with the creation of language academies in French Polynesia and New

are having a huge impact on indigenous languages. The situation in the

Caledonia, and national cultural councils in most Pacific Island states. In

Pacific has become more serious in the past few decades because of a

Vanuatu and now in New Caledonia, national networks of indigenous

marked increase in urbanization, with the consequence that speakers

language researchers have been set up, at the Vanuatu Cultural Centre

of a multiplicity of different languages come to live together, favouring

and the Centre Tjibaou respectively.

the use of major world languages and pidgins. Even some of the larger

In New Zealand, where the Maori language has been on the

languages, for example, Drehu in New Caledonia, are becoming severely

decline for some time, successful remedial action is being taken in the

endangered, at least for the younger generations who have moved away

form of ‘language nests’, focusing on pre-school and early primary-

75

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

school education in Maori. In Australia, there has been remarkable

languages simply add the knowledge of Tagalog to their repertory of

progress in language preservation, documentation and in some cases

languages, without losing their own languages in the process.

revitalization of critically endangered languages. Government-funded
language centres have been established all over the continent, from
1

northern Western Australia to New South Wales.



Indonesia

There are large numbers of languages in Indonesia – well over 400

In much of the Greater Pacific area, then, there is today a strong

Austronesian and some 240 Papuan languages, bringing the total to

awareness and appreciation of the cultural and linguistic wealth of

over 600. More than a quarter of the indigenous languages of Indonesia

the region, as Pacific people hold firmly to their identities in the face

may be considered vulnerable or endangered. The only language used

of globalization. At the same time, inexorably, the smaller languages

for all official and public purposes, and the media, is Indonesian. There

lacking intergenerational transmission continue to be lost.

is no direct oppression of any other language, as has been practised
by monolingual speakers of dominant languages in Australia and

Languages in the Greater Pacific area

the Americas, but there is some discouragement of speakers of local
languages in several parts of Indonesia. Because education is solely in
Indonesian, children are conditioned to regard it as superior to their



The Philippines

own mother tongues, and they use it at home and with other family

Of the more than 100 languages in the Philippines, all Austronesian,
2

members in preference to their own languages, which then become

13 are vulnerable or endangered. There is great tolerance shown

progressively endangered. It should be noted that parts of Indonesia,

towards small languages in the Philippines, and there are no monolingual

especially Kalimantan and Irian Jaya (Papua), are not well documented

speakers of dominant European languages or other comparable

at present.

aggressive monolingual speakers there today – hence there is little
language endangerment from that quarter. The speakers of very large



Philippine languages, such as Tagalog (10 million first-language and

Papua New Guinea has more than 750 local languages – the highest

between 30 million and 40 million second-language speakers) are mostly

number in any area of comparable size in the world. Very few of them

monolingual, but usually bi- and multilingual speakers of small Philippine

have tens of thousands of speakers, but a large number can be classified

Papua New Guinea

as small to very small, with a few hundred speakers or far fewer. Until
three decades or so ago, Papua New Guinea was the area least affected

76

1.
2.

For more on the situation in Australia, see the following chapter.
See also the chapter on South-East Asia, southern China and Taiwan
(China).

by language endangerment in the world. Speakers were, and still are,
fiercely proud of their languages, which they regard as the main symbol
of their ethnic identity.

Greater Pacific area

There has been a great increase in mobility in the past thirty years,

much government encouragement, the local vernaculars have remained

however, resulting in a steadily rising number of marriages between

relatively safe, as there is only one major urban centre, Honiara, the

speakers of different languages. Moreover, many of these marriages

capital.

involve languages outside the range of the country’s widespread

As communication between the islands is relatively undeveloped,

traditional multilingualism. In such cases, the family usually adopts the

Solomon Islanders still speak their own mother tongues, and generally

national language Tok Pisin, a contact language and lingua franca

the language or languages of their neighbours. It is not uncommon for

spoken by over 80 per cent of all Papua New Guineans as a language of

speakers to use more than one local language, plus Pijin and/or English

wider intercommunication. It has a complex Austronesian-type grammar

in a single conversation, depending on the circumstances. Naturally,

and many English-derived words. Children are beginning to learn it as

Solomon Pijin affects the local languages, but not more than in the

their first language, starting the chain of potential endangerment.

neighbouring states. Of the Austronesian languages in the Solomon

Only some thirty major languages are used in education and by
the media, thereby reducing the importance of many other languages

Islands, more than ten may be considered endangered and three
critically endangered.

in the eyes of the local people. Though the attitude of the government
and the authorities towards all local languages is positive, the situation



is difficult. Of the Austronesian languages of Papua New Guinea, about

Many years of Anglo-French condominium status as the New Hebrides

thirty-five are vulnerable or definitely endangered and three extinct,

did little to help preserve the more than 100 languages of Vanuatu, and

while among the Papuan languages spoken in Papua New Guinea, more

since independence in 1980 the English-based lingua franca Bislama,

than forty may be considered vulnerable or definitely endangered, and

which is similar to the Tok Pisin of Papua New Guinea, and Solomon Pijin,

thirteen have become extinct in recent times.

has brought increasing pressure to bear on them. All the languages of

Vanuatu

Vanuatu are Austronesian. More than thirty are vulnerable or endangered



The Solomon Islands

and three have recently become extinct. Since independence, however,

In the Solomon Islands, where there are more than sixty indigenous

the Vanuatu Cultural Centre has established a nationwide network of

languages, all Austronesian except for four Papuan languages, the

Melanesian researchers who work energetically throughout the country

government and senior leaders are largely members of an English-

to promote, document and preserve local languages and cultures.

educated elite. English is very much the prestige language and language

This work, under the aegis of the Vanuatu National Cultural Council,

of education, whereas the English-lexifier Solomon Pijin, the alternative

has ensured that many small languages are still relatively safe. At

national lingua franca, is regarded as somehow inferior. Major languages

the same time, expatriate linguistic researchers work closely with the

adopted as church languages, such as Roviana, Kwara’ae, Ghari and

Vanuatu Cultural Centre to record and document critically endangered

Nggela, have remained strong. At the same time, and in the absence of

languages.

77

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger



New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands

Polynesia

In New Caledonia, French, as a dominant world language spoken by

Of the Polynesian languages, Hawaiian on the Hawaiian islands and

monolinguals, has had a strong impact on local languages. Of the

Rapanui on Easter Island almost became extinct some time ago. New

60,000 indigenous people, today only some 30,000 still have an active

Zealand Maori, in spite of having large numbers of speakers, was also

command of one or more local languages. Since the strong awakening

definitely endangered, in the face of English. All three languages have

of Kanak ethnic identity among the local population some three decades

now been revitalized and are currently functioning quite well. However,

ago, however, the language situation has been improving, especially

their long-term future remains uncertain. The Tahitian language in the

since the signing of the Noumea Accord (1998) and the establishment of

Society Islands had been receding before French, especially in the

the Tjibaou Centre.

town of Papeete, the capital of French Polynesia, but has recovered

Since that time, four New Caledonian indigenous languages have

strongly during the last two decades, and is now in turn threatening

been taught at the University of New Caledonia, and Kanak languages

other neighbouring Polynesian languages (especially Tuamotuan), as

are offered, to a limited degree, at primary and secondary level. In

well as the two languages of the Austral Islands, and is beginning to

recent years a network of Melanesian researchers has been set up, as in

put pressure on Marquesan. There is now a Tahitian and a Marquesan

Vanuatu, along with the establishment of a Kanak language academy. Of

language academy, and both of these languages have a place in the

the twenty-eight Austronesian languages spoken there, some thirteen

school curriculum, where French is the major language of instruction.

are considered threatened or definitely endangered and two have
recently become extinct.



Fiji and Rotuma

There are three Austronesian languages spoken here, all fully
functional.



Micronesia

Of the languages spoken in Micronesia, all Austronesian, three are
vulnerable or endangered and one is extinct. In Micronesia, English
has had a significant impact on local languages, to the extent that even
major languages such as Chamorro, spoken on Guam and neighbouring

78



islands, are considered vulnerable.

Australia
Michael Walsh

In describing the indigenous language situation in Australia for the third
edition of this Atlas, one can observe significant differences from the
previous two editions. In 1996, when the first edition appeared, global
interest in endangered languages was just emerging and the appearance
of the Atlas may well have contributed to the increased activity reported
in the second edition of 2001. For Australia, one major report on the
indigenous language situation was still being prepared and another was
to appear a few years later (as mentioned in the section below), resulting
in a more precise picture. At the same time, major efforts had been
taking place in language revitalization to the extent that the situation
now seems a good deal more positive. By the time the fourth edition
appears, one hopes that further efforts of this kind can be reported and
that we will have a more precise account of the linguistic demography.

Some indeterminacy in Australian
linguistic demography
It should first be emphasized that for Australia there are areas of
uncertainty in pinpointing language locations and numbers of speakers.
I have relied heavily on recent and relatively comprehensive reports like
the State of Indigenous Languages in Australia – 2011 (SOIL) (McConvell
and Thieberger, 2002) and the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Studies’ National Indigenous Languages Survey
(NILS) (AIATSIS, 2005). These have drawn on extensive research and
consultations through a wide network of contacts across Australia.
Despite these best efforts some indeterminacy remains because, on
the one hand, the precise location of a language may be the subject of
ongoing dispute. As a result, one should take the locations of languages

79

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

I have provided in this Atlas as only approximate. On the other hand,
determining numbers of speakers is beset by such problems as degree

The figures in Table 2 reflect the distinction: ‘Speaks other
languages and speaks English’ in contrast to ‘Speaks English only’.

of proficiency, multiple linguistic affiliations and the quality of the national
census.
In Australia the federal government compiles a census every five
years. This material is readily available online from the Australian Bureau
of Statistics (ABS, 2006: www.abs.gov.au), but can be confusing. At first
glance, the figures in Table 1 are encouraging.

Table 2. Language spoken at home based
on place of usual residence (2006 census)
Very well
or well

Not well or
not at all

Proficiency
in English
not stated

Total

40,846

9,902

1,247

51,955

Source: ABS, 2006.

Table 1. Number of speakers of Australian
indigenous languages at home
1996 census

2001 census

2006 census

48,193

50,978

55,699

The 2001 census disaggregated the two categories, ‘Not well’ and ‘Not
at all’ (see Table 3).

Source: ABS, 2006.

This suggests an upward trend with a modest increase between 1996
and 2001, but a more significant increase of a little over 9 per cent

Table 3. Language spoken at home based
on location on census night (2001 census)

between 2001 and 2006. However, these figures are based on ‘location

Very well
or well

Not well

Not at all

Not stated

Total

on census night’, whereas there are other figures based on ‘place of

36,215

9,549

2,659

1,341

49,764

usual residence’. Following this latter rubric, the 2006 census gives a

Source: ABS, 2001.

total of 51,995 – a much more modest increase. However, this figure is
not quite what it seems.

80

Not surprisingly, the Australian Bureau of Statistics has been lobbied for

The questions posed by the 2006 census are likely to produce

some years by the Australian Linguistic Society and other professional

misleading answers. Participants were given a choice between two

organizations to change the categories – but to little effect. Suffice

possible answers when commenting on their language proficiency: ‘Very

it to say that the ABS figures should be regarded as indicative rather

well or well’; ‘Not well or not at all’. If I was asked to comment about my

than definitive. Within a particular state or territory, apparent upward or

proficiency in French, I would have to choose the latter: not well or not at

downward trends must be treated with caution. For example, the figures

all. But then how would one know that I am not prepared to assert that I

in Table 4 show the language spoken at home on census night in the

speak French well or very well but that I do speak it to some extent?

Northern Territory (NT).

Australia

Table 4. Language spoken at home based on
location on census night (Northern Territory)
1996 census

2001 census

2006 census

28,464

31,271

29,244

Source: ABS, 2006.

The apparent rise in 2001 and fall in 2006 may simply be a result of
speakers under- or over-reporting their proficiency. In a survey of New
South Wales (NSW) languages undertaken in 1999 and 2000 (Hosking
et al., 2000), it was not uncommon for an Aboriginal person to declare

Table 5. Yan-nhangu groups
Group

Patri-moiety

Walamangu
Gamal

Yirrchinga

Ngurruwula

Linguistic
affiliation

Full
Partial
speakers speakers

Total

Burarra/Yannhangu

27

89

116

Yirritja

Yan-nhangu

2

4

6

Bindararr

Yirrchinga

Burarra/Yannhangu

5

10

15

Gurryindi

Dhuwa

Yan-nhangu

8

30

38

Malarra

Dhuwa

Yan-nhangu

10

36

46

Gamalangga Dhuwa

Yan-nhangu

9

35

44

that the language was ‘finished’ but then burst into an apparently

Table 5 provides information on the Yan-nhangu groups, their moiety

fluent conversation with another Aboriginal person who had walked

and the number of people speaking Yan-nhangu fully and partially. The

into the room. This is an example of under-reporting. On the other

term ‘moiety’ essentially refers to two basic subdivisions within a group

hand, there have been times when I have used my minimal knowledge

while ‘patri-moiety’ emphasizes father–child sets.

of an Aboriginal language only to hear myself being described not long
afterwards in these terms: ‘He speaks the language right through.’

These results are in sharp contrast to the seven speakers in the
NILS Report, estimated with a high level of reliability. This is not to

It is only in rare instances that we have fine-grained linguistic

denigrate the NILS Report’s findings, because clearly the level of detail

demography based on sustained long-term research. For the Yan-nhangu

provided by James (2009) is not, and mostly cannot be, replicated across

language of eastern Arnhem Land, James (2009, p. 91) provides these

indigenous Australia. It also raises questions about what factors should

details:

be included in a finer-grained linguistic demography. Issues such as
‘language ownership’ have particular resonance in Aboriginal Australia.
There are approximately 150 Dhuwa heritage owners (those

People may describe themselves as owning a particular language and

with patrilineal ancestral connections to Yan-nhangu language,

enjoy widespread community agreement with that ascription even

land, sea and mardayin, sacred paraphernalia), and a further

though their language proficiency is virtually nil (see also Walsh, 2002).

150 Yirritja Burarra-Yan-nhangu (Walamangu Gamal, Gidjin-

This is just one other factor that muddies the waters when census data

gali) people with language ownership rights.

are being recorded.

81

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

We conclude this section with a consideration of the labels used to

After some years of deliberation, an official launch took place

describe language endangerment. Krauss (2007, pp. 7–10) ponders which

on 30 July 2004 of the New South Wales Aboriginal Languages Policy

languages can be regarded as ‘safe’ and decides that one requirement

(NSW, 2003). This was the first state-wide policy for Aboriginal languages

involves safety in numbers: a minimum of 100,000 speakers. None of

adopted in Australia. Discussions are under way in Victoria to develop

Australia’s indigenous languages come close to meeting this requirement.

a similar approach. The situation in other states and territories remains

The closest would be the English-based creole, often referred to as

piecemeal although there has been some work in the Northern Territory

Kriol, with some 20,000 speakers. In these terms, even those Aboriginal

towards an NT Indigenous Languages and Culture Policy. Even when

languages learned by children as a matter of course as part of their

an official policy has been launched, it is not clear that the specifics

normal upbringing and maintained throughout their lives should be

of the policy will be implemented. Of course one impediment to

considered vulnerable. Accordingly, I have labelled languages of this

implementation is cost, so it is timely that we have a thought-provoking

kind, like Arrernte or Warlpiri, as vulnerable. Krauss has an additional

essay on the economic costs and benefits of Australian indigenous

requirement that creates another major obstacle for Australian languages:

languages (Mühlhäusler and Damania, 2004).

‘safe’ languages ‘would be those that enjoy recognition and support as
national languages of nation-states or at least as regional languages
thereof’ (2007, p. 8). While, regrettably, no Australian languages enjoy
such a status, this leads us to the issue of language policy.

Emergent languages
The discourse of language endangerment is full of terms like death,
decline and extinction. Languages are described as critically endangered;

Language policy

the global situation is pictured in terms of decline, loss, tragedy. In

An admirable overview of Australian language policy can be found in

in the south-east of Australia, that might be described as ‘emergent’.

McKay (2007), who summarizes the situation with particular regard to

Despite many years of decline, recent initiatives mean that the languages

Australian indigenous languages as follows:

are much more in use now than they were when the first edition of this

contrast to received wisdom there are Aboriginal languages, especially

Atlas was published in 1996 and have even progressed since the second

82

It seems clear that planning in relation to the Aboriginal

edition appeared five years later. In what follows, I will mainly focus

language habitat has been sporadic and to a considerable

on just two states, South Australia and New South Wales, not because

degree uncoordinated beyond local or state based arenas

there is no activity in other areas, but for reasons of brevity and because

and from program to program, and much of what has been

these are two of the states that were virtually blank in earlier editions of

achieved has depended on the innovation and commitment of

the Atlas. First, however, a few comments are necessary on three other

individuals and specific organizations. (p. 103)

regions.

Australia

  	Queensland, the Northern Territory
and Western Australia

of South Australia has supported a range of language revitalization

The situation is mixed in these regions: there are some pockets

efforts across the state, including Arabana. For this language, the

of ‘strong’ languages, some areas where the languages are not

NILS Report’s estimate of the number of speakers is six. In a reference

in common use and some instances of language revitalization. In

grammar, Hercus (1994) described the language based on information

Queensland, for instance, Gugu Badhun, a language described as

provided by the last remaining speakers. A linguist and trained teacher,

extinct in earlier surveys, is undergoing some revitalization (Souter,

Greg Wilson, has worked with Hercus in recent years to produce a

2004). However, such efforts have not received much support in this

massive pedagogical resource (over 500 pages) to support school-

state, so that many languages are no better off now than they were

based language learning from Reception (kindergarten) to Year 10

ten years ago.

(Wilson and Hercus, 2004). This has been followed up by an electronic

The Department of Education and Children’s Services (DECS)

At the official level, the Northern Territory has recognized its

resource that includes audio clips of all the Arabana written examples

substantial indigenous population in a report on indigenous languages

included in the text. Thus we have steps towards a solution to the

and culture in Northern Territory schools (NT, 2005) and other initiatives.

problem of learning to speak a language when the speech community

School-based initiatives are underpinned by the Indigenous Languages

is virtually non-existent.

and Culture component of the Northern Territory Curriculum Framework,

A similar project has been carried out for Adnymathanha (Tunstill,

which has separate approaches for language maintenance and language

2004) and another is in progress for Diyari. Across the state – by 2006

revitalization.

– some nine languages were being taught in fifty-three sites. This

It is particularly difficult to make generalizations about the state

includes some ‘strong’ languages like Pitjantjatjara and Yankuntjatjara

of Western Australia, partly because of its sheer size: it is larger than

but also languages that had fallen to a very low ebb like Adnymathanha,

western Europe and nearly four times the size of Texas! Suffice it to say

Arabana, Gugada, Ngarrindjeri and Wirangu as well as Kaurna.

that some languages are continuing to decline while others are being
brought back with varying degrees of success.

Kaurna, the language of the Adelaide Plains, is noteworthy
because it is a prime example of what can be achieved with the
right confluence of circumstances: a substantial documentary base,



South Australia

strong community involvement and sustained input from a suitable

Much of the state of South Australia is arid, so the bulk of the population

linguist. Even by the most generous estimates, it would usually have

resides in the south-eastern corner and, not surprisingly, the languages of

been regarded as extinct by 1950. But now it is taught at all levels of

this region bore the brunt of early and sustained contact from outsiders.

education: right through school, university and adult education. Even

The healthier languages like Pitjantjatjara and Yankuntjatjara had their

ten years ago, over a hundred public speeches were being delivered in

traditional territories in the remote north-western corner.

Kaurna each year (Amery, 2000; see also Amery, 2002).

83

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger



New South Wales

New South Wales (NSW) was the first state to be settled and until

oldest and thus endangerment is graded. If we focus specifically on

recently most of its languages were seen as extinct or at best severely

Gumbaynggirr, by now there must be hundreds of people who have had

endangered. By 2008 eleven Aboriginal languages were being taught in

some significant exposure to the language over the last twenty years.

around sixty schools across the state. Typically, the majority of students

Each year additional cohorts of semi-speakers are being created – for

are of Aboriginal descent and many of these courses are pitched to the

instance, through a series of summer schools called Ngaawa-Garay

earlier years of schooling. However, in recent years some students have

Girambang Ngiyabalgarra and offered at Beginners level as well as

taken their indigenous language studies right through to the final years

Advanced: ‘These are intensive courses aiming to develop speaking

of school. At present the New South Wales Board of Studies supports

skills in the languages, and will be quite demanding,’ the organization’s

an Aboriginal Languages K-10 Syllabus (NSW, 2003) and discussions are

website announces (http://www.muurrbay.org.au/abor_lang_summer_

under way to introduce an additional syllabus to accommodate the final

school_2009.html).

two years of school.

How then should Gumbaynggirr be graded? It is clearly not extinct

One important reason for the success of some of the language

because it is not true that ‘There is no one who can speak or remember

revitalization efforts in NSW is the emergence of community-based

the language.’ Nor is it true that it is critically endangered because the

language centres. These foster and coordinate such activities as producing

youngest speakers are young children rather than being in the great-

crucial documentation and providing relevant training for Aboriginal

grandparental generation. Nor can it be severely endangered. Can it be

people. Particularly noteworthy here is the Muurrbay Aboriginal Language

definitely endangered? Perhaps not – because I doubt that the language

and Culture Co-operative (http://www.muurrbay.org.au/), which began

is ‘being learned as the mother tongue by children in the home’. However,

to promote the Gumbaynggirr language in 1986. The Many Rivers

I am told that when parents speak Gumbaynggirr to their children, the

Aboriginal Languages Centre (http://www.muurrbay.org.au/mralc.html)

children typically respond in the language. With some reluctance, I have

has operated under its auspices since 2004. This organization serves

designated Gumbaynggirr as critically endangered, though none of the

languages running in a coastal strip from the Queensland border down

gradings of endangerment quite captures the situation on the ground

to a little north of Sydney. In a short time it has produced comprehensive

for this and quite a few other Australian languages.

reference grammars and dictionaries for most of these languages as well
as a significant range of pedagogical materials. Interestingly, most of
these languages would have been described as critically endangered or
extinct in earlier surveys.

84

of language decline, the most fluent speakers will usually be the

Such ‘emergent languages’ pose a challenge to the standard
approach to grading degrees of language endangerment. In situations

Australia

The role of the media
in language maintenance

brief. To that end, it began radio broadcasting in a range of Centralian
languages, including Arrernte, Pintupi and Warlpiri. The content of
such broadcasts is not restricted to immediate local concerns but also

An important vehicle for language maintenance is the use of the media,

includes national and sometimes international news delivered in these

including radio and television. Apart from the electronic aids mentioned

languages.

above in connection with Arabana that involve audio clips of language
examples, there is an over-reliance on print material for language
maintenance. This is not such a problem when one is immersed in a
vibrant speech community, but it is less effective for gaining adequate

Conclusion

speaking and listening skills in situations of language revitalization. One

As in other regions of the world, many of Australia’s indigenous languages

of the more spectacular examples of the use of the media in language

are in danger of disappearing. However, efforts over the last two decades

maintenance can be found in central Australia. From 1987 the Nganampa

– particularly with regard to highly endangered languages in the south-

Anwernekenhe series has produced nearly 200 half-hour episodes for TV,

east of the country – have begun to stem this tide. Languages that were

introduced on its website as follows:

thought to have disappeared or were in serious danger of disappearing
are now reappearing. As mentioned above, this presents challenges

The primary aim of Nganampa Anwernekenhe is the main-

for how we assess language endangerment. On the basis of numerical

tenance of Aboriginal languages and culture. Nganampa

strength and the extent of official recognition, we can confidently say

Anwernekenhe is broadcast in Aboriginal languages, and is the

that none of Australia’s indigenous languages are safe. But it is less clear

only Aboriginal language program produced by and broadcast

how the other terms should be applied: ‘normal’ language decline has

to Aboriginal people. The series showcases the diversity of

been interrupted by language revitalization so that a significant number

life in Central Australia, and is subtitled so it is accessible to

of languages now have partial speakers at all ages, and the youngest are

people who do not speak the indigenous languages used in

sometimes the more fluent speakers.

each program.
Their policy is set out on the same website (http://caama.com.au/category/
productions/nganampa-anwernekenhe/). This initiative comes under the
umbrella of the Central Australian Aboriginal Media Association (http://
caama.com.au/), which became an independent Aboriginal organization
in 1980 and sees Aboriginal language maintenance as a key part of its

85

South America
Willem Adelaar

South America (with the inclusion of the Caribbean islands) is a textbook
example of an area that combines unusual linguistic diversity (118 families
according to Kaufman, 1990) with an extraordinarily high extinction rate.
Violent conquest, epidemics, occasional massive destruction and socioeconomic stratification in which indigenous groups were traditionally
confined to the lowest strata of society have combined to erase much of
the subcontinent’s original rich linguistic diversity.
More than 400 indigenous languages survive in South America
(none in the Caribbean islands), but they are unevenly distributed
geographically. Large parts of South America (the central Colombian
highlands and valleys, central Venezuela, eastern Brazil, northern Peru,
Tierra del Fuego and most of Argentina) have lost almost all their
indigenous languages, mostly without previous documentation of any
significant kind. Furthermore, the situation of the surviving languages
is alarming. Many of them have extremely low speaker numbers (for
example, almost all the 150 languages of Brazil). Languages that do have
significant speaker numbers (Quechua, Aymara, Mapuche, etc.) are often
plagued by the low motivation of speech communities in handing them
on to younger generations of speakers. The resulting massive language
shift to a dominant European language (Spanish, Portuguese) is difficult
to counter and is an even greater threat to language survival than mere
small speaker numbers. In spite of occasional official recognition and
protective government measures, all the indigenous languages of South
America are unstable and thus vulnerable.
On the positive side, research on the indigenous languages of
South America has expanded spectacularly during the last twenty years,
methods to stimulate language maintenance and language revival have
been developed, and the interest of indigenous groups in their languages
and programmes geared at preserving and revitalizing them has been

South America

awakened. At the same time, national governments are increasingly
inclined to recognize and protect the existence of indigenous groups and
their languages. In this context, Brazil, where more than ten universities
and institutions contribute actively to the study and preservation of
languages, has come to occupy a leading position in the region. Private
funding programmes, such as the Documentation of Endangered
Languages (DoBeS) of the Volkswagen Foundation in Germany, and
the Endangered Languages Documentation Programme (ELDP) at the
School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), University of London, have

Table 1. ‘Ethnic membership’ of Colombia’s
population (2005 census)
Total numbers

Percentage

National population

41,468,384

100.00

Indigenous population (national)

1,392,623

3.43

Afro-Colombian population

4,311,757

10.62

4,858

0.01

Roma (Gypsy) population
Source: DANE, 2007, p. 34.

contributed greatly to the study and documentation of South American

Colombia, within its minority indigenous population, presents one of the

languages. In 2007 DoBeS installed servers for the systematic storage of

most diverse linguistic patterns in all of Latin America. Not only does it

(indigenous) language data in Argentina, Brazil and Peru.

have representatives of the Arawakan, Barbacoan, Chibchan, Cariban,

In the meantime, many South American languages have been lost

Chocoan, Tupian, Saliba-Piaroan, Quechuan, Guahiban, Makuan and

beyond retrieval. Some of them have recently become extinct, others

Witotoan families, many of which extend beyond its borders, but it is

have only one or two speakers left (Tinigua, Uru, Yahgan, etc.). Due to

also the centre of the widespread Tucanoan language family. In addition,

the rapidity of the extinction process, ‘discoveries’ of lost languages are

there are seven presumed language isolates in Colombia: Camsá, Páez,

not unusual. One of the most striking cases is the identification in Entre

Timigua, Andoke, Ticuna, Cofán and Yaruro.
The country may be fairly described as belonging to both

RÍos, Argentina, of a speaker of Chaná, a language that was supposed to
have been extinct since the middle of the nineteenth century.

highland and lowland South America, as its indigenous languages are
distributed in three broad regions: the lowland coastal area, the Andean

Colombia

region1 and the Amazon region bordering Brazil and Venezuela.
Since the arrival of the Spanish in the sixteenth century the
indigenous population of Colombia has been in steady retreat, first from



Demography

the conquistadors and most recently from economic exploiters of the

In 2005 a general population census was carried out in Colombia that,

vast natural local resources. In recent times their settlements have largely

apart from questions about numbers, families, residence, economic

been confined to the coastal area, and inland to the banks of rivers

units and farming units, included a module on ‘ethnic membership’.
According to this census, the population of Colombia was distributed as
shown in Table 1.

1.

For more on the Andean region, see the following chapter.

87

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

such as the Putumayo, Caquetá, Orinoco, Guaviare, Meta, Vaupés and

representatives of indigenous communities. The reserves are collective

Apaporis. Many indigenous people, such as the speakers of declining

property and inalienable.

Chibchan languages inland, have sought to avoid contact with intruders;
others have declined in numbers through assimilation.
In recent years, several autonomous indigenous organizations
have arisen to defend the ethnic identities, lands and traditions

In Colombia the indigenous education programme, supported
by indigenous organizations, has over the past three decades sought to
reclaim the land and residential rights of the indigenous peoples of the
country.

of Colombian minorities. The Organización Regional Indígena

In spite of enlightened legislation and a pro-indigenous policy,

Emberá Wounaan (OREWA, Wounaan Emberá Regional Indigenous

Colombian indigenous groups have suffered severe losses due to the

Organization), for example, was established with the support of

situation of internal war that has prevailed in their country over the last

various indigenous bodies that had already been set up, such as

few years. The situation will certainly have consequences for the survival

the Consejo Regional Indígena de Cauca (CRIC, Cauca Regional

of their languages, although an exact assessment is not possible at

Indigenous Council) and sections of civil society. So far, OREWA has

present.

extended its organizational activities to almost 200 indigenous Chocan
communities.
Groups such as the Emberá on the north coast have in recent

Brazil

years reclaimed their organizational autonomy, as a consequence of

In Brazil, the largest country in South America, language extinction

which they are seeking to keep education, at least at the primary level,

has been an ongoing process over the last five centuries. This is due

in their own hands, and have developed school materials and published

to a dramatic reduction of the indigenous population as a result of

grammars.

war, epidemics and assimilation. In north-east Brazil, once an area of
considerable linguistic diversity, only one language has been preserved



88

Government indigenous policies

(Yatê). In that area, the last speakers of the Karirí language family

(With the editorial assistance of Tulio Rojas Curieux)

disappeared at the beginning of the twentieth century. Most of the

According to the 1991 Constitution, the state recognizes and protects

languages still spoken are now found in the western part of the country,

the ethnic and cultural diversity of the nation; Spanish is the official

mainly in the area called Amazônia Legal. According to Moore, Vilacy

language of Colombia, but the languages and dialects of ethnic groups

Galucio and Gabas (2008), the actual number of indigenous languages

are official on their territories. Teaching provided in communities with

spoken in Brazil may be a quarter of what it was in 1500.

their own linguistic traditions is to be bilingual. The form of the territorial

The total number of indigenous languages actually spoken

entities is subject to the stipulations of the Law on Territorial Regulation

in Brazil is estimated at 180, but Moore et al. (2008) observe that

and its delimitation by the national government with the participation of

some of the Brazilian languages generally listed as separate may be

South America

closely related varieties of one another, so that the true number of

both Brazilian and foreign academic institutions cooperate. Grammatical

independent languages may oscillate around 150, rather than 180. (Of

descriptions as well as extensive and thoroughly archived data collections

these 150 languages, at least one fifth are said to be severely or critically

are becoming available at a rapid pace. Nevertheless, the sheer number

endangered.) This also means that the actual loss of diversity could be

of languages as well as their critical situation make it necessary to keep

much greater than suggested by the number of languages surviving

up these efforts.

today, because some of the differences within present-day language
groups may be the result of relatively recent changes.

Of the indigenous languages of Brazil, 13 per cent have
a reasonably complete description, 38 per cent have an advanced

Brazil is conspicuous for having many languages with extremely

description, 29 per cent have some scientific description and 19 per

low speaker numbers. Some with only one or two speakers (e.g. the

cent have insignificant scientific description.2 In recent years, concern for

Tupi languages Apiaká, Guarasú and Xipaya, the Arawakan languages

language endangerment and language documentation has increased

Kaixana and Yawalapiti, the isolate Máku, etc.) are probably beyond all

greatly in Brazil. Nineteen languages have been documented by the

possibility of recovery. On the other hand, the phenomenon of emerging

major international programmes (DoBeS, ELDP and the National Science

ethnic groups (identidades emergentes) that has become significant in

Foundation [NSF]) and more documentation has been supported by

different parts of the country holds the promise that some reportedly

UNESCO, the United States Agency for International Development

extinct languages may still be rediscovered. The Brazilian indigenous

(USAID) and Brazilian agencies.
Several ground-breaking government initiatives are noteworthy.

language with the largest number of speakers is Ticuna, with over 30,000
speakers in the border area with Colombia and Peru.

The Workgroup for Linguistic Diversity of Brazil’s Instituto do Patrimônio

Brazilian indigenous languages belong to several stocks of

Histórico e Artístico Nacional (IPHAN, Institute of the National Historic

languages that are subdivided into remotely related language families

and Artistic Patrimony) is planning a field survey of the current situation

or one-language branches: Macro-Jê, Tupí, Cariban, Panoan, Tucanoan,

of all the country’s languages. The methodology for this field survey is

Arawá, Katukinan, Makú, Nambikwaran, Chapacuran, Yanomami, Mura-

being devised and tested. Brazil’s Fundação Nacional do Índio (FUNAI,

Pirahã and Guaicurúan. Nambikwaran, Mura-Pirahã, as well as most

National Indian Foundation) has acquired significant funding (approx.

branches of Macro-Jê and Tupí, are exclusive to Brazil, but the other

US$2 million) for a programme of active documentation of indigenous

families extend into neighbouring countries. Boran and Zamucoan are

languages and storage of the recordings. Two Brazilian institutions, the

only marginally represented in Brazil. Isolates or unclassified languages

Museu do Índio and the Museu Goeldi, now have servers with digital

are relatively few in number: Aikaná, Iranxe-Mynky, Kanoê, Kwazá, Máku,

language archives.

Trumái and Ticuna. All but Ticuna are exclusive to Brazil.
Over the last two decades, great scientific progress has been
made in the study of the indigenous languages of Brazil, an area in which

2.

Data from Denny Moore and Bruna Franchetto.

89

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Concern for language maintenance is widespread among native

Most of Venezuela’s indigenous languages, including several

Brazilian groups and documentation is highly popular. The Brazilian

historically important extinct ones, belong to the Cariban and Arawakan

national census of 2010 will include a question to ascertain which

language families. Other important language groups are Salivan and

language the respondent habitually uses at home. These measures

Yanomami. Both language families extend into neighbouring countries.

indicate a progressive attitude in the country that justifies a certain

The isolates Warao and Yaruro are mainly found in Venezuela, although

optimism, in spite of the large number of endangered languages that

there are some speakers in neighbouring countries. Additional linguistic

need attention.

isolates are Hodi, Awaké/Uruak and Sape/Kaliana.

Brazil’s progressive legislation and state organizations such as

Languages of the Chibchan, Guahiboan Maku-Puinave and

FUNAI encourage indigenous groups to preserve their identity and

Tukanoan families are found in the border regions. The Tupi-Guaraní

their languages. Digitized archives of language data are applied to this

lingua franca Yeral/Nheengatu (from Portuguese língua geral) has also

effect, with occasional success. The link between ethnolinguistic identity

reached Venezuelan territory.

and the recognition of indigenous land rights can have a motivating

Several languages in Venezuela are close to extinction, for

effect. In spite of the critical situation of most of the Brazilian indigenous

instance, Mapoyo (Cariban) and the elusive Awaké and Kaliana. The

languages, moderate optimism is justified.

Arawakan language Yavitero became extinct in the twentieth century
due to the near-extermination of the group.

Venezuela

90

According to the 1999 Venezuelan Constitution, the official
national language is Spanish (Castilian) while the indigenous languages

Venezuela has about thirty surviving indigenous languages, including

are of official use for the indigenous peoples. Nevertheless, these need

some vital ones such as the language of the Guajiro (Wayuu), one

to be respected throughout the nation. Accordingly, indigenous peoples

of the fastest-growing indigenous ethnolinguistic groups in South

have the right to demand bilingual intercultural education (BID-IIDH,

America. These languages are mainly located in the southern part of

2003).

the country (Amazonas, Apure, Bolívar), at its western borders and in

According to the Law of Indigenous Peoples and Communities

the eastern area (Amacuro delta). In the central part of the country and

(2005), the state is committed to developing language revitalization

the Andean highlands of western Venezuela, no indigenous languages

programmes and writing systems for each of the languages (Article 77).

are left. Among the lost languages are two families of the Venezuelan

Official and legal documents are to be translated into the indigenous

Andes and their Caribbean foothills, Timote-Cuica and Jirajaran, which

languages and their speakers can demand the right to an interpreter

became extinct in the first half of the twentieth century. (The Ethnologue

during legal hearings. Indigenous people also have the right of access

mentions the existence of an unidentified language in the Timote-Cuica

to bilingual intercultural programmes, bilingual health programmes and

area, which has never been confirmed.)

bilingual means of social communication (Article 94).

South America

The Law of Indigenous Languages (2008) not only recognizes and

and French Guyana. Three additional indigenous languages are spoken

promotes such languages and their use at the local and national level

in French Guyana: (Arawakan) Palikur, (Tupi-Guaraní) Wayampí and

but also applies to bilingual intercultural programmes.

Émérillon. In general, the indigenous languages of the Guyanas extend
into the neighbouring countries, Brazil and Venezuela (or did so until

The Guyanas (including Suriname)

recently). Émérillon and Taruma are exceptions.

The three Guyanas share the characteristic of a fairly acculturated

of mixed origin are spoken in the Guyanas. An interesting example in

indigenous population in the coastal region, mainly speakers of

Guyana is Berbice Dutch creole, which contains elements of Dutch,

Lokono Arawak and Carib (Kariña, Galibi), and more traditional groups

Arawak and a West African language.

Apart from the indigenous languages, several creole languages

located in the interior of the country. The coastal languages are now

Indigenous groups of the Guyanas largely depend on

severely endangered, although Carib has proven more resistant to

non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and private institutions or

language shift than Arawak. A small pocket of Warao-speakers (see

programmes for the documentation, revitalization and research of

the section on Venezuela above) remains in the northern coastal

their languages. In French Guiana, the Institut de Recherche pour le

region of Guyana.

Développement (IRD, Research Institute for Development) plays a

A phenomenon of ethnolinguistic merger can be observed

significant role.

among some of the indigenous communities of the interior. The Waiwai,
a Cariban-speaking group in southern Guyana, were originally a mixed
community, as were the Trio (also Cariban) in southern Suriname.

Paraguay

Speakers of (Cariban) Tunayana, Sikïiyana and (Arawakan) Mawayana

Paraguay is the only Latin American country with an indigenous majority

can be found among them. There are also Akuriyo, whose (Cariban)

language, Paraguayan Guaraní. Used in the Jesuit missions of the

language is reported to be extinct. A few speakers of the historically

seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Guaraní became closely linked

important Taruma language, an isolate with Brazilian roots, live among

with the Paraguayan cultural and national identity. It is a recognized

3

the Arawakan-speaking Wapishana in south-west Guyana.

official language along with Spanish. However, Guaraní is used by

Cariban-speaking groups in western Guyana are the Arekuna

almost the entire Paraguayan population, whereas many people in

(Pemón), the Akawayo and the Patamona (also known as Kapón), and

the countryside have no knowledge of Spanish. Although Paraguayan

the Makushí. Speakers of Wayana live in the border region of Suriname

Guaraní is not immediately endangered, its indigenous legacy is
jeopardized in everyday speech by massive borrowing from Spanish at
all levels (lexicon, syntax, idioms, etc.). The colloquial variety of Guaraní

3.

Information from E. B. Carlin.

heavily influenced by Spanish is often referred to as Yopará.

91

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Most of Paraguay’s Guaraní-speaking population is settled east

Buenos Aires and other cities. Some Mapuche-speakers, descendants of

between the Paraguay and Paraná rivers. In that area some traditional

the Araucanians who invaded from Chile in the eighteenth and nineteenth

groups of Guaraní-speakers (Chiripá, Mbyá, Pai-Tavyterã) preserve their

centuries and assimilated local groups such as the Ranquelche and the

own conservative dialects of the language. The elusive Aché-Guayakí

Gününa Küne, are settled in central and western areas of Argentina.

speak a language related to Guaraní, although they may be descendants

Their language is in a process of abandonment.

of an older non-Guaraní population. They have been subjected to severe
persecution in the past, and their survival as a group is uncertain.

Recently extinct languages are Gününa Yajich and Ona (belonging
to the Chon family). The Ona or Selk’nam people of the main island of

The other indigenous linguistic minorities in Paraguay have their

Tierra del Fuego became the victims of repression at the beginning of

origin in the Gran Chaco area, west of the Paraguay River, although some of

the twentieth century. Due to the physical disappearance of the group,

them have migrated to the economically more developed eastern section.

the last Ona-speakers died in the 1980s. Gününa Yajich was the language

These languages belong to different families: Lengua-Mascoi, Matacoan,

of the Gününa Küne or Gennaken, the northernmost group of the

Zamucoan, Guaicurúan and Tupi-Guaraní. Although there is no immediate

Tehuelche complex in Patagonia. It existed until the 1960s. Except for

danger of extinction, the languages of the Lengua-Mascoi family and the

the southernmost group located in southern Patagonia, most Tehuelche

minor languages of the Tupi-Guaraní family are at the greatest risk.

languages (Southern Tehuelche, Teushen, Gününa Yajich) were replaced
by Mapuche and became extinct for that reason.

Argentina

92

Vilela was spoken in the Bermejo River area in the eastern Gran
Chaco. It is a member of the otherwise extinct Lule-Vilela family. The

Indigenous groups and their languages have disappeared completely

descendants of the last surviving Vilela group live in the eastern Chaco

from most of the Argentine national territory, mainly due to a history

area, where they are mixed with the Toba. Documentation is being

of conflict between immigrants and native groups, including state-

obtained from the last semi-speakers.

organized repression. Several entire language families or possible

Languages of the Arawak (Chané) and Jê families (Kaingang)

isolates disappeared at an early stage, including Diaguita, Huarpean,

were reported as being spoken in Argentina in the past. They are no

Comechingón, Sanavirón, Pehuenche and Charrúan, mostly without

longer found there.

leaving any documentation of importance. Nevertheless, the recent

There is still a substantial number of speakers of the Matacoan

discovery of a semi-speaker of Chaná, a Charrúan language supposed to

and Guaicurúan language families in northern Argentina, with extensions

have been extinct for more than 150 years, is proof of the surprises that

into the Bolivian and Paraguayan Gran Chaco. However, once-numerous

a situation of relatively recent extinction can hold.

Guaicurúan groups such as the Abipón are now extinct.

Speakers of indigenous languages are now concentrated mainly

In north-west and north-east Argentina there is a substantial

in the border regions and, as far as recent migrants are concerned, in

presence of speakers of Tupi-Guaraní languages and Quechua. Quechua

South America

(Quichua) is spoken by some 100,000 people in the province of Santiago
del Estero, where it replaced the languages of local groups such as the

Chile

Lule and the Tonocoté. Until recently, however, the extension of Quechua

From the sixteenth to the nineteenth century, the history of Chile

in north-west Argentina was much wider, including the provinces of

was dominated by the struggle between the Spanish colonial power

Jujuy, Salta, Catamarca and La Rioja. The status of Quechua in these

and the native Araucanian or Mapuche people, who still constitute

areas is largely unknown. Paraguayan Guaraní extends into Argentine

the principal ethnolinguistic minority in the country. Nowadays, many

territory, but the province of Corrientes has its own variety of Guaraní

Mapuche, especially those living in urban communities in Santiago and

(Goyano). Other Tupi-Guaraní languages spoken in Argentina are Mbyá,

Concepción, have abandoned their ancestral language Mapudungun.

Tapieté and Chiriguano (Avá-Guaraní, Guaraní boliviano). The number of

The highest estimates for the number of Mapudungun-speakers oscillate

speakers of Chiriguano is substantial. It should be noted that quite a few

around 400,000, but the actual figure may be much lower. Mapudungun

Quechua-speaking Bolivians and Guaraní-speaking Paraguayans have

survives in the provinces of Cautín and Malleco (La Araucanía region)

taken up residence in Argentina.

and adjacent areas. In spite of many threats to their language, the

The total number of 600,000 indigenous people and descendants
of indigenous people reported for Argentina (INDEC, 2005; Censabella,
1999) may not accurately reflect the number of speakers of indigenous
languages.

Mapuche people are attached to it, and Mapudungun is now taught in
rural schools.
All other languages in Chile are either highly endangered or
extinct. The most vital languages are spoken by the Aymara in northern

The Argentine Constitution acknowledges the country’s different

Chile and by the Polynesian population of Easter Island (Rapanui). The

ethnic and cultural indigenous peoples and guarantees that their identity

Huilliche language, which is closely related to Mapudungun, is still used

will be respected as such. The National Law of Education (No. 26.206/06)

in some locations on the island of Chiloé, as well as in the provinces of

states that indigenous people have the right to demand appropriate

Osorno and Valdivia in southern Chile.

bilingual intercultural education programmes, while the state is committed

The Atacameño or Kunza language was spoken in the oases of

not only to improving the infrastructure of educational centres, but also

the Atacama desert until 1900. There have been reports of its survival

to facilitating permanent personnel training and developing appropriate

in remote locations until the 1950s. Several traditions, song texts and a

teaching methodologies, research and practices that reflect the country’s

certain fragmentary knowledge of the language and its pronunciation

ethnic, social and cultural diversity.

subsist until today. There is a desire for revitalization, although this now
seems a forlorn hope.
In the island area south and west of Tierra del Fuego, two small
linguistic isolates are nearing extinction: Kawesqar (or Alacaluf) and
Yahgan.

93

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

In 1993, by Law No. 19253, Chile established a series of regulations
regarding the protection and development of indigenous languages and
cultures, mainly through the Corporación Nacional de Desarrollo Indígena
(CONADI, National Corporation of Indigenous Development). Bilingual
intercultural education is also to be promoted in regions populated
by ancestral communities. The most important goal of the education
measures is to give indigenous people the opportunity to deal adequately
both with their local communities and with the global society.

Uruguay
The native groups of Uruguay, mainly speakers of Charrúan languages,
were eliminated during a series of wars in the first half of the nineteenth
century. Today, in the area of Montevideo, there are speakers of Mbyá
(Tupi-Guaraní) who migrated from neighbouring countries.4 The Guaraní
population that used to live in Uruguay is now entirely assimilated.

Caribbean islands region
There are no indigenous languages left in the Caribbean islands that have
survived the era of colonization. However, there is a community of Caribs
(originally speakers of Island Carib, an Arawakan language) on the island
of Dominica. The Island Carib-speaking population of neighbouring
Saint Vincent was deported to Central America by the British in about
1797. Their descendants in Belize, Guatemala and Honduras continue to
speak their language, Garífuna.

94

4.

Information from the Instituto Socioambiental (ISA), São Paulo.

South America:
Andean region
Marleen Haboud

For centuries, native Andean languages have been in general retreat
throughout the Andes. The level of threat varies from language to language,
and given the unreliability of the available data, it is impossible to know the
exact situation in each instance. Nevertheless, the general tendency is
one of accelerated loss as a result of a series of drastic changes resulting
from the penetration of Westernized ways of life and culture (missionaries,
tourism, transnational companies, etc.) into ancestral Andean communities.
Internal social, political and economic conflicts have also affected the vitality
of indigenous languages and peoples who have been forced to migrate.
Most Latin American countries have high rates of rural–urban internal
migration. Seventy per cent of the Andean countries’ populations now live
in urban areas,1 while rural areas lose between 1 per cent and 3 per cent
of their population to urban migration every decade (King and Haboud,
2009). The exact number of the indigenous population in the Andean
countries is not known, and official demographics usually underestimate
their percentage of the total population in each country. The indigenous
populations of Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru are shown in Table 1.

Table 1. Indigenous population: Bolivia,
Ecuador and Peru
Country

Total
population

Total
indigenous
population

Indigenous
population as
percentage of total

Year of
census

Bolivia

8,090,732

5,358,107

66.2

2001

Ecuador

12,156,608

830,418

6.8

2001

Peru

25,939,329

3,968,717

15.3

2000

Source: Del Popolo and Oyarce, 2005.

1.

According to CEPAR: www.cepar.org.ec.

95

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Ecuador

Ecuadorian Quichua has two main varieties: highland Quichua
and lowland (Amazonian) Quichua. Both implicitly and explicitly, Quichua

Ecuador, one of the smallest countries in South America (272,045 sq. km),

has been recognized as the country’s predominant indigenous language

is well known for its geographical, cultural and linguistic diversity. In

and it has a major influence on the other indigenous languages of the

addition to Spanish, there are thirteen indigenous languages, all of

Amazonian region. Estimates of the size of the Ecuadorian Quichua

them endangered. This is true even for languages with large numbers

population vary greatly, depending on the criteria for ‘Indianness’ and the

of speakers such as Quichua, which has around 1 million speakers in

methodological procedures used by researchers. The widely fluctuating

Ecuador and 8 million along the Andes. The indigenous languages

estimates vary between 340,000 and 3 million speakers.

of Ecuador are found in its three natural regions – the coast, the

The linguistic and sociolinguistic situation of Quichua also varies

highlands (Sierra) and the Amazon basin – and represent most of the

greatly from region to region and is multilayered, shaped by long-

linguistic families found in South America.

standing contact with Spanish but also with other indigenous languages.

In Ecuador, as in most Latin American countries, there is no general

However, Quichua plays an important public role in the country. It has

consensus about the number of speakers of indigenous languages or

proven to be an effective tool of empowerment with regard to the

the number of indigenous people, and official demographic estimates

dominant society, and it is used strategically during national and local

differ by source. Table 2 illustrates such discrepancies, which probably

uprisings (see Haboud, 2005).

result from the lack of precise data –collection methods and a rejection
of the national census by indigenous people.



Coastal languages

The existing languages of the coastal region of Ecuador are Awap’it (Awa



Ecuadorian Quichua

Coaiquer), Cha’palaa (Cha’palaache, Cayapa), Tsa’fiki and Sia Pedee

Quichua (Kichwa, Runashimi, Runa simi), which belongs to the Northern

(Epera Pedede). The first three belong to the Barbacoan language

Quechua branch (Quechua II) (Torero, 1964), is spoken to a greater or

group, whereas Sia Pedee is a Chocoan language. Awap’it and Sia

lesser extent in the Andean countries of Colombia, Peru, Bolivia, Chile

Pedee are transnational languages and their larger communities are

and Argentina (see the summary below). In Ecuador, it is spoken in

located in Colombia. Given their situation of migration, these languages

nine of the ten highland provinces and along the Amazon basin to the

have suffered a drastic loss of speakers.

east of the Andean mountain range. Although the word Quichua is

96

in general use in Ecuador, older speakers in the central and southern



highlands still refer to their language as Inga. A similar denomination

According to the last national census, 20.8 per cent (120,000) of the

is used in Colombia.

total population of the Amazonian region (576,748) are indigenous. The

Amazonian languages

languages spoken here represent the major South American language

South America: Andean region

Table 2. Ecuador: indigenous population of the Amazon basin 
Sources
Language

CODENPE
2008

Awap’it

3,750

1,600

1,000

Chachi

Cha’palaa (Cayapa)

457 families

4,000

3,450

Epera

Sia Pedee

250

150

50

Tsa’fiki (Tsa’fiqui)

2,640

2,000

2,300

Quichua (Kichwa, Runa simi, Runashimi)

–

3,000,000

1,400,000

A’i Cofan

A’ingae (Cofan)

728

800

800

Achuar

Achuar Chicham

830 families

500

2,000

Andoa

Shimigae (Andoa)

–

60

–

Quichua (Kichwa) Runa simi, Runa Shimi)

80,000

60,000

10,000

Secoya

Paicoca (Paikoka, Secoya)

400

1,000
(includes Siona)

290

Shiwiar

Shiwiar Chicham

–

700

–

Shuar

Shuar Chicham

110,000

40,000

46,669

Siona

Paicoca (Paikoka, Secoya)

360

–

250

Waotededo
(Waotiriro, Waodani, Huao Tiriro)

3,000

2,000

1,650 [2004]

Zaparo (Sapara, Kayapi)

114

100–200

170

Nationality

1

CONAIE2
1990/2008

Ethnologue
2000

COAST
Awa

Tsachila
HIGHLANDS (SIERRA)
Quichua
AMAZONIA

Quichua (Amazonia)

Waorani
Zápara
1.

CODENPE: Consejo de Desarrollo de las Nacionalidades y Pueblos del Ecuador (Council for the Development of the Nationalities and Peoples of Ecuador).

2.

CONAIE: Confederación de Nacionalidades Indígenas del Ecuador (Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador).

97

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

families: Western Tucanoan, Jivaroan, Quechuamaran and Zaparoan.

beyond the educational realm to the larger public sphere through

Two languages, A’ingae and Waotededo, remain unclassified. All these

national radio and television programmes, public announcements, street

languages are endangered at different levels by external conditions such

signs and every possible strategy that could help put into practice the

as the presence of settlers from other regions, transnational companies,

official policies in favour of the indigenous languages and peoples of

guerrillas, militarization, colonization and environmental degradation.

Ecuador.

There are two Zaparoan languages, Zaparo and Andoa (Shimigae),
both in a critical condition. Their nationalities are now native speakers of
Quichua.

Peru
Peru’s latest national census (2007) failed to reflect the country’s true

  	Safeguarding measures:
towards language maintenance

ethnic and multicultural character, as the number of indigenous people

National indigenous organizations in Latin America have raised

spoken by the head of the household or by his/her spouse – Spanish

awareness of indigenous peoples’ presence in each country. Permanent

versus non-Spanish). The total population was put at 27,412,157, with

mobilizations have driven their governments to accord official recognition

the indigenous population at 4,045,713 (nearly 15 per cent), although

to their languages and cultures. In Ecuador and throughout the Andean

traditional estimates consider that between between 25 per cent and

region, indigenous languages have become important symbols of

48 per cent of Peruvians are indigenous.

persistence and resistance. The 2008 Ecuadorian Constitution (Article

Most of Peru’s indigenous people speak Quechua (83 per cent),

2) recognizes Quechua and Shuar as official languages of intercultural

another 11 per cent speak Aymara, 2 per cent Ashaninka and the

relations. Over the last few decades, the government has prioritized

remaining 4 per cent are speakers of other languages of the Amazonian

several social policies that target the most vulnerable rural and urban

region. The first two languages are also spoken in other neighbouring

groups. Nevertheless, most of the linguistic and cultural policies intended

countries.

to preserve ancestral languages and cultures have not been adequately
implemented.

98

was determined on linguistic rather than ethnic criteria (the language

The indigenous languages of Peru represent twenty different
linguistic families, and there are at least forty-four vital languages (forty

All the Andean countries have national educational programmes

in the Amazonian region, four in the highlands). Such vitality is, however,

(intercultural and bilingual) that aim to safeguard ancestral languages.

relative, as it refers to a continuum that includes monolingual, bilingual

However, the positive impact of formal education on language

and even passive speakers who have lost the ability to use their native

maintenance is still limited in Ecuador and the sole target of such

language as the principal means of communication.

programmes continues to be the indigenous population, not the country

According to Gustavo Solis, who provided invaluable guidance

as a whole. At present, several local organizations are trying to move

regarding the language situation in Peru (personal communication,

South America: Andean region

December 2008), it is difficult to determine the exact number of

processes of colonization, the degree of preservation of their territory

indigenous languages spoken there. If we understand a living language

and environment, social discrimination, internal cohesion within their

as one that is at least known by any one speaker as a mental object

ethnic group, poverty levels, and migratory flows to Spanish-speaking

(passive knowledge), and not necessarily as his/her main means of social

regions (especially to the capital, Lima). Chirinos (n.d.) considers that in

communication, then such Amazonian languages as Resigaro, Munichi,

the near future there will be many more bilinguals who learn Spanish at

Taushiro and Andoke are spoken only by isolated individuals living

the expense of their native language.

among speakers of other languages, and thus have no active speech

It is important to stress that the vitality of some Amazonian

community. It is not easy to determine whether some of the clan names

languages is not directly related to the high number of speakers but

used by speakers refer to actual languages or to language varieties.

to people’s living conditions. In lowland Amazonia, some small groups

Furthermore, there are indigenous groups who still live in voluntary

have managed to preserve their ecosystem, which guarantees their

isolation in the Amazonian region, and it is practically impossible

sustainability as well as their cultural and linguistic continuity.

to obtain reliable information about them and their languages. For

According to the Constitution of Peru (Articles 19, 48, 89), all the

example, fourteen indigenous peoples are recorded as living in isolation

indigenous languages enjoy official status, but this has limited practical

throughout the Peruvian Amazonian region (Vinding, 2003).

impact. It is, rather, the process of regionalization that seems to be more

All the Amerindian languages and peoples of Peru are threatened

important in giving the minority languages greater opportunities for

by a complex web of situations: their degree of social isolation, the social

survival. This depends on the relative number of speakers per region and

and economic benefits offered to speakers of indigenous languages, the

their opportunities for empowerment vis-à-vis the dominant society.

Table 3. Number of indigenous people by self-identification (2001 census)
AREA

ETHNIC IDENTITY
Quechua

Aymara

Chiquitano

Guaraní

Moxeño
(Mojeño)

Other native
languages

Total

Urban

790,436

761,712

76,808

45,709

34,028

37,736

1,746,429
(55.6%)

Rural

765,205

516,169

35,410

35,488

12,308

31,628

1,396,208
(44.4%)

TOTAL

1,555,641
(49.5%)

1,277,881
(40.6%)

112,218
(3.6%)

81,197
(2.6%)

46,336
(1.5%)

69,364
(2.2%)

3,142,637
(100%)

Source: INE, 2001.

99

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Bolivia

languages are endangered, even the most widely spoken (Quechua and

Although Bolivia seems to be a step ahead of the other countries in

the last three decades. Such an increase is accompanied by the fact that

the region regarding its demographic information about indigenous

between 1992 and 2001 the urban population increased by 40 per cent,

languages and peoples, there are still some discrepancies between

mainly due to the rural–urban migration. Consequently, some 1.7 million

official statistics and those provided by the indigenous organizations.

indigenous people are now urban-dwellers, while only approximately

According to the most recent national census (INE, 2001), out of the

1.4 million have remained in rural areas. This has transformed many of

total population aged 15 and over (8,234,325), 62.05 per cent (5,033,814)

Bolivia’s main cities into multilingual spaces where indigenous languages

identified themselves as indigenous.

are still widely spoken and new linguistic varieties emerge as a result of

Aymara). Figure 1 shows the increase in Spanish monolingualism over

The largest indigenous language groups are Quechua (49.5 per

contact with Spanish and other indigenous languages. Some see this as

cent), Aymara (40.7 per cent), Chiquitano (3.6 per cent) and Guaraní

a potentially successful strategy to modernize native languages, making

(2.6 per cent). All the other languages have fewer speakers (see Table 3).

them more compatible with a fairly Westernized urban lifestyle. Under

There are about forty vital languages in Bolivia, although such vitality

such conditions, languages like Quechua and Aymara would have a

is relative since some of them have only a few speakers. Several of Bolivia’s

Figure 1. Comparative percentages of Spanishand indigenous language-speakers in Bolivia
Spanish

Quechua

Aymara

87.4



Linguistic rights and state policies

Bolivia’s reformed Constitution of 1994 recognized the country’s
multiethnic and plurilingual character, as well as indigenous rights.

Other indigenous languages

The same year, bilingual intercultural education became the basis of
the national education system (Law No. 1565). According to this law,

82.6

78.8

better chance of survival.

indigenous languages must be used in indigenous schools and also be
taught in non-indigenous educational centres. It became mandatory
to create bilingual curricula for schools located in bilingual regions. In
2000 thirty-five indigenous languages were declared official (Decree No.

39.7

34.3

28.8

100

1.1

25894) and were promoted as the main instrument of formal education.

27.6

23

One of Bolivia’s current goals is to generate bottom-up linguistic

18.5
2.5

1.5

Sources: INE, 2001; Haboud, 2008, after Sichra (in press); INE – www.ine.gov.bo

policies that take into account indigenous peoples’ own political projects.
Bolivia is the only Andean country where Quechua and Aymara are used
daily in public spaces, radio broadcasting and TV programmes. This will

South America: Andean region

surely maintain some of the indigenous languages, mainly Quechua and
Aymara, as vital languages.

There are other transnational languages in the coastal and
Amazonian regions. Languages of the Barbacoan and Chocoan families
share borders with Ecuador and Colombia, while Tucanoan languages

Summary

extend into Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Brazil. The Tupi-Guaraní family
has speakers in Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay and Peru. There are still
many isolates; Bolivia alone has about a dozen languages without a



South America and the central Andean region

South American countries are very diverse, not only in their geographical

family affiliation. A few ethnic groups remain in voluntary isolation and
their languages are still unknown.

features and ecology, but also in their ethnic, cultural and linguistic
composition. Many linguistic families are represented throughout the
region. Some 100 vital languages – all of them endangered – are found

Table 4. The transnationalism of Quechua
and Aymara in South America

in the central Andean region (Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia).
Quechua and Aymara are the most widely spoken languages
in the Andean highlands (see Table 4). Quechua consists of two main

Language and number of speakers
Country

branches: the languages spoken in central Peru (Quechua I) and those

Argentina

spoken elsewhere (Quechua II), which are found both north and south

Bolivia

of Quechua I. The language is known as Inga in Colombia, Quichua in

Chile

Ecuador and Argentina, and Quechua elsewhere. It has between 8 million
and 12 million speakers throughout South America (from Colombia
to Chile) and has expanded to rural and urban areas, replacing local

Quechua
(Quichua) 6,739

Aymara
1

4,104

2,530,985

2,001,947

6,175

48,501

Colombia

(Inga) 19,079

Ecuador

(Quichua) 499,292

languages such as Zaparo and Andoa in Ecuador. Nevertheless, Quechua

Peru

3,214,564

440,816

populations are affected by poverty, migration, local political crises,

Total

6,276,834

2,495,368

social and economic inequalities, and all kinds of globalizing factors
with negative impacts on the vitality of their language. Spanish has been
influenced by a series of Quechua phonological, syntactic, semantic and
pragmatic characteristics, and shifting to Spanish is the goal of many
Quechua-speakers. The degree of vitality of Quechua varies greatly in
each country, each region and each speech community.

1.

The numbers of Quichua-speakers in Argentina vary greatly, depending on the source.
The figure given in Table 4 comes from Encuesta complementaria de pueblos indígenas (ECPI) and does not include non-indigenous Quichua-speakers or Bolivian
Quechua-speakers who have migrated to Argentina (www.indec.gov.ar/webcenso/
ECPI/pueblos/datos/W020601.xl).

Sources: INDEC (Argentina); INE (Bolivia); INEC (Ecuador); Chirinos, 2001; Sichra, in
press.

101

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger



Demographics and discrepancies

National and local indigenous organizations in each of the

There are still many discrepancies regarding the demography of

countries discussed have found ways to raise their voices to demand

indigenous peoples and indigenous languages throughout the central

equal treatment. So far, they have brought about important social

Andean area. This is mainly due to different criteria and methodologies

changes at different levels (local services, internal budgets directed to

applied to national and local censuses, to disagreements between

indigenous issues, and so on); however, the most isolated indigenous

national and local interests and to ongoing internal and external

groups still need further help and encouragement. Maintaining their

migratory movements.

ancestral land is now one of the main conditions for the preservation of
language and culture.


Indigenous languages, low prestige and
sociolinguistic insecurity

the subject of extensive academic research; others need further analysis.

Historically, indigenous languages have been discriminated against

materials for language preservation and revitalization.

and their speakers have been treated as second-class individuals. This
has driven many speakers to systematically hide their languages in an
attempt to achieve higher status within mainstream society and better
social, economic and political conditions.
The impact of modernization and globalization on most traditional
lifestyles needs to be taken into account when developing new initiatives
in favour of indigenous languages and peoples.



Safeguarding measures

In all the central Andean countries, at least one indigenous language has
been declared official (or of official use), and new linguistic and cultural
policies have been developed with the aim of safeguarding ancestral
languages and cultures. At the level of implementation, however, much
remains to be done. In addition, all these countries have developed
bilingual intercultural educational programmes. It is hoped that this will

102

bring positive benefits both for speakers of indigenous languages and
for society as a whole.

Many of the indigenous languages of Latin America have been
It is important that the existing documentation is converted into effective

Mexico
and Central
America
Yolanda Lastra

Every day we become conscious of increasing globalization: each time
we find fruit from a different continent for sale in our shops or when
we buy clothing with material from one country, made somewhere
else, with labels in several of the world’s dominant languages. While
we celebrate the rapid communications made possible by the internet,
we are more aware of continuing violence and human suffering. Small
communities find it difficult to survive in this changing world; increasing
urbanization is eradicating precious languages that took centuries to
develop their idiosyncratic character, perfectly adapted for use within
their particular environment, economy and culture. Economic and
social pressures from dominant groups foster bilingualism in both
local and world languages; lack of work encourages migration, which
in turn may lead people to abandon their native language in favour of
one that allows them to acquire a better way of making a living.
No doubt every linguist has pondered the situation, causing
some to concentrate on describing it scientifically, trying to document
language loss, language contact, language displacement, or revitalizing
languages by different means. A small contribution to the reversal of
the trend of language displacement and eventual extinction is to
make laypeople aware of the loss we face as human beings. This Atlas,
a joint effort by a small group of specialists, represents one positive
way of educating the public in the hope that they will contribute to a
reversal of the tragedy of world language homogenization.
Mexico’s history as a nation begins with the conquest of
what was called New Spain in the sixteenth century, but it has
roots in pre-Columbian times, when Nahuatl-speakers in its central
area dominated many groups speaking diverse languages. Although
the northern area was not as densely populated, many languages
were spoken there. In Chiapas and Yucatan, Mayan languages

103

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

predominated. With the arrival of the Spanish conquistadors, Castilian

have the right to be supported and defended by officers and interpreters

Spanish became the official language, but most indigenous languages

who understand their culture.

survived in spite of severe demographic losses. With independence

In 2003 a federal law recognized the linguistic rights of indigenous

from Spain in 1821, Spanish continued as the official language,

peoples, including those Amerindians who have settled in the country

and indigenous languages suffered discrimination and gradual shift

since independence. The Instituto Nacional de Lenguas Indígenas

that continues to this day in spite of recent attempts to reverse the

(INALI, National Institute for Indigenous Languages) was created at the

trend.

same time. Its purpose is to promote the development of indigenous
Central America comprises seven independent countries. Belize,

formerly British Honduras, has a separate history and did not become

languages and to advise all three government levels about appropriate
policies leading to their protection.

independent until 1981. Panama was part of Colombia but became

In 2006 changes were made to the Education Law, giving speakers

a separate country in 1903. The other five countries (Guatemala, El

of indigenous languages the right of access to education both in their

Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Costa Rica) shared a common

own language and in Spanish. Previously, Spanish was the sole medium

history until former provinces separated and became independent

of instruction, although indigenous languages were taught as subjects in

countries early in the nineteenth century. Some of the differences

primary schools located in areas where such languages are spoken.

between these countries and central Mexico go back to pre-Hispanic

In 2005 INALI published the Catálogo de lenguas indígenas

times, when the isthmus had a distinct culture from that of Mesoamerica

mexicanas: cartografía contemporánea de sus asentamientos históricos

(Constenla Umaña, 1991; Lastra de Suárez, 2006). Other differences are

[Catalogue of Indigenous Mexican Languages: Present-day Cartography

due to the large African population imported by the Spaniards to work

of their Historical Settlements]. This series of maps includes all the

in the mines and the consequences of piracy.

communities where a given language or variety is spoken, giving number
of speakers, percentage in comparison with speakers of the dominant

104

Mexico

language (Spanish) and other such statistics. In January 2008 INALI

There has been a major change in Mexico since the publication of the

lingüísticas de México con sus autodenominaciones [Catalogue of

second edition of the Atlas: a Constitutional amendment (August 2001)

Indigenous National Languages: Linguistic Variants of Mexico and their

declared that the nation is pluricultural, and that indigenous peoples

Self-designation].

published its Catálogo de las lenguas indígenas nacionales: variantes

are those who inhabited the present-day territory when colonization

For many years linguists have been debating the number

began and who, at least partially, preserve their own social and cultural

of languages in Mexico. For a long time, some official documents

institutions. Indigenous communities should have the right to preserve

recognized 56 languages, but linguists suspected there were around

and enrich their languages; their customs should be respected; and they

150. Here we face the perennial problem of deciding what is a well-

Mexico and Central America

differentiated dialect and what is a language. It is a particularly difficult

The research undertaken for this Atlas was partly based on the

issue when there is no standardization, as with Mexican indigenous

above-mentioned INALI publications and on an unpublished INALI

languages. Most of the country is mountainous, and villages and small

document that includes number of speakers and child speakers by variety.

towns where a given language is spoken are not in touch with other

Census data usually refer to the 2000 census, but some contributors

communities. Consequently, speakers in one town find it difficult to

preferred to use 2005 figures based on a partial census by the Instituto

understand speakers from another town when they come into contact,

Nacional de Estadística, Geografía e Informática (INEGI, National Institute

so that they may resort to Spanish, for many years the only official

of Statistics, Geography and Computer Science). Census figures refer to

language and still the lingua franca. When there are conflicts over land

the number of speakers aged 5 years or older.

or rivalries over the control of water sources, for example, people may

Within the confines of this Atlas, it would clearly be impossible to

deny that they have a common language. Consequently, unless detailed

compare statistics for all Mexico’s indigenous languages; a few examples

sociolinguistic studies are carried out, it will be difficult to decide exactly

will suffice. On average, the number of speakers has not changed

how many languages there are and what territory they occupy.

markedly in the last ten years: the number of Huave-speakers has

In general, what was previously considered a language with

increased from 11,955 to 25,568; Pame from 5,700 to 7,736; Purepecha

a traditional name employed since colonial times, such as Mixtec or

from 94,835 to 97,914; Kiliwa from 41 to 56; and Cucapá from 136 to

Totonac, is really a family of languages: it might consist of two languages

206. Others have decreased: for example, Mazatecan from 168,374 to

(as in the case of Mazahua and Pame) or as many as forty (as in the case

165,596; Mazahuan from 127,826 to 115,935; Chichimec from 1,582 to

of Zapotec). There are names for these families, but frequently not for

1,362; Matlatzinca from 1,452 to 651; and Ocuiltec from 755 to 405.

their constituents. INALI’s commitment to the defence of languages has

Even if there are considerable numbers of speakers, languages are

caused it, in some cases, to over-differentiate and to classify as separate

endangered if fewer children acquire them.

languages what linguists would call dialects. This has to be borne in

In summary, forty-six languages in Mexico appear to be

mind when consulting the maps prepared for this Atlas because in many

vulnerable, thirty-five are definitely endangered, thirty-three are severely

cases we have followed INALI’s nomenclature.

endangered and nineteen are critically endangered.

INALI uses the language classification in Campbell (1997), but
adopts the term ‘language family’ for what linguists consider a stock,
‘linguistic group’ for what linguists would generally call a family, and

Central America

‘language or language variety’ for what linguists would call languages

Two of the seven countries that constitute Central America, Panama

or highly differentiated dialects. The final count includes 11 ‘language

and Belize, have had a history separate from that of the other five

families’ (stocks), 68 ‘linguistic groups’ (families) and 364 ‘varieties’

countries, which evolved together. Between 1525 and 1535 Spanish

(languages or highly differentiated dialects).

invaders conquered the region and towards the end of the century they

105

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

governed it as one entity, with the exception of what is now Panama. This

There has been no definite government support for bilingual

was a time when piracy ravaged the Atlantic coast with the help of the

intercultural education, although over half the children of school age

indigenous peoples, mostly Miskitos. Spanish settlers imported Africans

speak a Mayan language and in spite of a 2003 language law that

to work in the mines. Since many of them mixed with the indigenous and

proclaims support for indigenous languages.

Spanish inhabitants, an Afro-Caribbean culture developed from Belize to
Panama. This history explains the origin of English-based creoles that are



still spoken today along the Atlantic coast.

El Salvador is the smallest country in Central America and the only one

El Salvador

By 1821 the different provinces had succeeded in winning their

with no Atlantic coastline. It had speakers of Lenca and was later settled

independence and eventually became five separate countries with Spanish

by speakers of Pipil, a Uto-Aztec language. Most Pipil-speakers were

as the official language. Panama had been integrated with the south since

accused of being communists and were nearly exterminated in 1932; the

1570 and became a separate country in 1903 when the Canal was built.

survivors did not transmit the language to their children, but now there

Belize was settled by pirates and later by Jamaicans. Britain established

is some hope for its revitalization.

a colony there in 1862 and granted it independence in 1981. Its official
language and the language of education is English but most people speak



an English-based creole, although there are also Mayan-, Spanish- and

Honduras was a flourishing centre of Mayan civilization before the

Garífuna-speakers. Two Amerindian languages were found to be vulnerable:

Spanish conquest. According to the latest language count (2001), 15 per

one definitely endangered and the other severely endangered.

cent of the population are of African or Amerindian descent and about

Honduras

half of them speak an indigenous language.The descendants of former



Guatemala

semi-nomadic tribes inhabit the tropical forests in the eastern part of the

Guatemala has had a turbulent history since it became a republic in

country. They have preserved their languages (Miskitos and Garífunas)

1839, and the indigenous population has until recently been denied

and take the lead in demanding political rights. In 1997 some steps were

basic linguistic and other rights. The revolts, the civil war and the

taken to support the development of bilingual education but results

constant political upheavals have not provided a conducive climate for

have thus far been limited.

the granting of linguistic rights. Consequently, even though the figures

106

for the number of speakers of indigenous languages are high, many



peasants seek work outside their communities and become bilingual;

Spanish conquistadors arrived in Costa Rica in the sixteenth century,

they subsequently abandon their native language in favour of Spanish.

when the Nahuatl culture still prevailed in the north-west and Chibchan

Many squatters live in Belize and others try to migrate north, crossing

influences were manifest in the south-east. Today, speakers of indigenous

over illegally to Mexico.

languages constitute only 1 per cent of the population. The University of

Costa Rica

Mexico and Central America

Costa Rica carries out excellent research on Amerindian languages and



supports several maintenance programmes in the country.

Information about the linguistic situation of indigenous languages in

Acknowledgements

these countries was obtained from Adolfo Constenla (Costa Rica) in the



Nicaragua

form of publications and personal communications; Danilo Salamanca,

Settled by the Spanish in 1524, Nicaragua quickly saw its indigenous

particularly on Misumalpan languages, but generally through his contacts

population decimated by war and disease. Today just 5 per cent of

for most of Central America; Lucía Verdugo for Guatemala; Marcela

the population is Amerindian, largely confined to the Caribbean coast.

Carías for Honduras; Ana Montalván for Panama; Colette Grinewald for

In 1979 the Sandinista Popular Revolution raised hopes among the

Nicaragua; and Jorge Lemus for El Salvador. In addition, Anita Herzfeld

marginalized indigenous communities of the Atlantic coast that they

provided information on Atlantic English-based creoles. Most of the

would be incorporated politically into the nation. Autonomy was granted

census data was obtained from the internet with the help of Manuel

to two territories where bilingual education programmes are supported.

Suárez. Their generous support is gratefully acknowledged.
This chapter also benefited from the contributions of several



Panama

specialists. We express our gratitude for the sharing of their knowledge

Panama was settled by the Spanish in 1519 but had a continuous

and list them according to the language or family in which they work:

(Chibchan, Chocoan, Cueva) settlement going back at least 10,000

Steve Marlett (Yuman, Seri and Algic); Zarina Estrada (northern Yuto

years. Almost all the surviving indigenous languages have adequate

Aztecan); Carolyn MacKay and Frank Treschel (Totonacan); Thomas

orthographies. Intercultural bilingual education is being made effective.

Smith-Stark (Mixtecan and Zapotecan); Claudine Chamoreau (Purepecha);

Furthermore, there is currently a plan for the National Assembly to

Samuel Herrera (Huave); Loretta O’Connor (Oaxaca Chontal); Leopoldo

declare these as official languages together with Spanish.

Valiñas (Mixe-Zoque); and Antonio García Zúñiga (Mayan).

107

United States
of America
Chris Rogers, Naomi Palosaari and Lyle Campbell

This chapter treats the endangered indigenous languages of the
continental United States. We survey the situation with respect to specific
languages and some of the efforts to preserve and revitalize them. With
regard to extinct languages, our scope is limited to those that have
become extinct since the creation of UNESCO in 1945; the picture would
be markedly different if all the extinct languages known were included
(see Golla et al., 2007).
In some situations, geographical locations for particular
languages are difficult to give with precision. Numerous languages
are or were spoken over a wide area, but many have not been studied
in a way that would provide a clear understanding of the extent of
their territory. Others are spoken in several non-adjacent locations.
For example, Shoshoni (Shoshone) is spoken in several different places
across four states, including the Fort Hall Reservation in Idaho; the Wind
River Reservation in Wyoming; Ibapah, Brigham City, and the Goshute
Reservation in Skull Valley, both in Utah; Ely, Duck Valley, Duck Water
and Battle Mountain, all in Nevada; and numerous others – with about
2,000 speakers spread across these communities.

Historical and geographical
context
The continental United States is an area of extreme linguistic loss, since
many of the languages once spoken here have disappeared and many
others are highly endangered. When Europeans first arrived, some 280
native languages were spoken in what is now continental US territory,
representing 51 independent language families (including language
isolates, that is, language families with only one member and no known

United States of America

relatives). Nearly half of these languages are now extinct, and all the
1

Other families will soon follow – Chinookan, Maiduan, Palaihnihan,

surviving languages are endangered to some extent. The fifty-one

Wintuan and Yukian all have fewer than twenty elderly speakers. Of the

language families include the following:

280 languages once known here, more than 115 (over 40 per cent) are

• Fourteen larger language families, with several member

already extinct, and, as mentioned, many others will soon follow.

languages each: Algic, Caddoan, Cochimí-Yuman, Eskimo-Aleut,

Children are learning very few of these languages, although

Iroquoian, Kiowa-Tanoan, Muskogean, Na-Dene (narrow sense),

there are many programmes aimed at language revitalization. Among

Plateau, Salishan, Siouan-Catawba, Utian (Miwok-Costanoan),

the numerous factors contributing to this large-scale linguistic loss, we

Uto-Aztecan and Wakashan.

mention three general ones (see Grinevald, 1998). First, the small number

• Sixteen small language families, made up of a few languages

of speakers of some languages makes them especially vulnerable to

each: Atakapan, Chimakuan, Chinookan, Chumashan, Coosan,

pressure from the dominant English-speaking culture. Second, in some

Kalapuyan, Keresan, Maiduan, Palaihnihan, Pomoan, Salinan,

cases there has been a shift from one language to another unrelated

Shastan, Timucuan, Wintuan, Yokuts and Yukian.

indigenous language as tribes have formed confederations or been

• Twenty-one isolates: Adai, Alsean, Aranama, Calusa, Cayuse,

forced to share a single reservation. Third, there is pressure on speakers

Chimariko, Chitimacha, Coahuilteco, Esselen, Karankawa, Karuk,

of all ages and levels of proficiency to shift to English for reasons such as

Kutenai, Natchez, Siuslaw, Takelma, Tonkawa, Tunica, Washo,

education and perceived economic advantage.

Yuchi, Yana and Zuni (Campbell, 1997; Goddard, 1996; Mithun,
1999; Golla, 2007; Golla et al., 2007).

These problems are accentuated by the fact that the often
prevailing attitude in the US is one of anti-bilingualism and of English-only
policies. This affects the resources available to language communities to

Of these fifty-one language families, nearly half (twenty-four) are already

preserve and use their native languages (Hinton, 2001a). The pressure

extinct, twelve of them since 1945. Half of the small families (eight out of

towards language shift results in a devaluation of native languages and

sixteen) are extinct, and many of the twenty-one isolates have become

their cultures.

extinct, where only five have speakers today. Several branches of larger

It should also be noted that linguistic and cultural loss can occur

families have also been lost: Eyak in Na-Dene; Southern New England

irrespective of the size of the language. Even for languages that have a

Algonquian and Wiyot in broader Algic; Tsamosan in Salishan; Costanoan

large number of speakers such as Navajo (with approximately 120,000),

in Utian; Catawban in Siouan-Catawba; Klamath-Modoc and Molala in

the threat of extinction through shift to a dominant language is still

Plateau; and the Cochimí branch of Cochimí-Yuman, among others.

significant, since each year fewer Navajo children speak the language
fluently. A recent study found that only 45 per cent of Navajo children
spoke fluent Navajo at the time they entered pre-school, between the

1.

Much of the information here follows Golla (2007) and Golla et al. (2007).

ages of 3 and 5 (Platero, 2001). The impact of external social factors on

109

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

the extinction of languages is now well understood,2 and it is clear that

The Karuk community of northern California, for example, has

no minority language of any size is safe from extinction unless there are

formed a committee whose goal is the restoration of their language.

strict policies in place to promote it.

This committee is faced with the daunting task of increasing language

The situation in California is revealing. At the time of the 1849

usage. They have opted for the ‘communication-based instruction’

Gold Rush, nearly 100 different indigenous languages were spoken

approach to language teaching. This method is believed to have ‘a

there. Now, there are fewer than fifty with fluent speakers, nearly all

real, positive, and – we hope – lasting impact on the rejuvenation of

elderly, and in none of these cases do any of the speakers use the

the Karuk language’ (Supahan and Supahan, 2001, p. 197). The goal of

indigenous language as their first language. Unless dominant attitudes

the programme is to introduce students to the language through new

change and some of the revitalization efforts under way are effective, the

vocabulary, followed by a guided practice in the use of the language

near future will see the disappearance of all California’s American Indian

and then an independent practice (Supahan and Supahan, 2001, p.

languages.

196). It is hoped that students will then have acquired the vocabulary
and will use it in their daily lives outside school and the classroom.

Language revitalization

This programme appears to meet the goals and expectations of the
language committee.

Recent years have seen an increased interest in language preservation and

Another frequently cited example comes from the Navajo

revitalization all over the world, including the United States (Hinton and

community in Fort Defiance, Arizona. Navajo is the largest indigenous

Hale, 2001). Many American Indian language communities are interested

language in the US, but it is not impervious to threats to its survival.

in language maintenance efforts and revitalization programmes.

In the 1980s the community surveyed the language abilities of K-2

However, due to insufficient support and a lack of resources, most of

students for their competence in Navajo and reported a worrying trend:

these programmes have a limited capacity to effect change. Some

most school-age children did not have even a passive knowledge of

aim to increase the number of speakers over time; others try to ensure

the language. Community members were alarmed at the contraction

that young members of the community have increased contexts in

of use among younger members and decided on a school immersion

which to hear and speak the language; others have an interest in

programme to encourage the use of Navajo. This programme requires

maintaining traditions and other cultural goals. All the communities that

Navajo to be the language of instruction from kindergarten to fifth grade,

have language programmes are concerned with the loss of their cultural

with decreased instruction in the language as children grow older. The

identity and heritage, with which language is closely connected.

community reports an increase in the contexts in which children use
Navajo and an increased general interest in Navajo culture throughout

110

2.

See Dorian, ed. (1989) for a good introduction; and England (1998) for a
discussion of the situation with regard to Mayan languages

the community. Nevertheless, Navajo is still not considered safe and is
faced with the threat of extinction (Arviso and Holm, 2001, pp. 203–15).

United States of America

A number of approaches and programmes for language

include: vocabulary teaching,4 language nests and pre-schools,5 master-

preservation, revitalization or revival have been adopted, including

apprentice programmes,6 the Head Start programme,7 immersion

‘language nests’ (for example, tribally sponsored pre-schools), occasional

classes,8 immersion camps,9 school programmes,10 courses at universities

school classes where the American Indian language instruction

and tribal colleges,11 internet and distance education,12 and various

is on the model of second-language acquisition, immersion camps,

summer programmes, language courses for adults and community

immersion programmes in schools, adult language classes, adult literacy

programmes.

programmes, the internet (used effectively in dispersed communities: for

Some revival efforts involve languages that no longer have native

example, Potawatomi and Choctaw), the master-apprentice programme,

speakers, based on documentation from earlier times.13 Several of these

the Breath-of-Life programme, and others.

programmes are considered success stories.14

The often cited master-apprentice programme, begun in
California, is believed to have had considerable success in meeting its
goals. It was designed to allow ‘native speakers and young adults to
work together intensively so that the younger members may develop
conversational proficiency in the language’ (Hinton, 2001b, p. 217).
While this programme has had a number of success stories, it also
has limitations because of the lack of resources like time and energy.
However, it is a step in the right direction in that it takes a proactive
stance in language preservation.
Revitalization and language instruction programmes of various

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

types are under way for numerous languages.3 They vary greatly, and

9.
10.

3.

11.

Alabama, Arapaho, Arikara, Assiniboine, Atsina (Gros Ventre), Blackfoot,
Catawba, Chemehuevi, Cherokee, Cheyenne, Choctaw, Chumash, Cocopa,
Coeur d’Alene, Creek, Crow, Delaware, Dena’ina, Diegueño, Gwich’in, Hanis,
Hopi, Kalispel, Kansa, Klallam, Klamath, Kutenai, Laguna (Acoma-Laguna
Keresan), Lakota Sioux, Luiseño, Lushootseed, Maliseet-Passamaquoddy,
Mandan, Maricopa, Massachusett-Narragansett (Wampanoag), Menominee,
Miami-Illinois, Miluk, Mohave, Mohawk, Mutsun, Navajo, Nez Perce, Northern
Paiute, Ojibwe, Omaha, Pawnee, Potawatomi, Quechan, Rumsen, Sahaptin,
Seneca, Serrano, Shawnee, Shoshone, Washo, Winnebago (Ho-Chunk),
Wyandotte, Yuchi (Euchee), Yup’ik, Yurok and Zuni, among others.

12.
13.

14.

For example, Karuk, Quechan and Quileute.
Alabama, Delaware, Lakota Sioux, Maliseet-Passamaquoddy and Wukchumne
(Wikchamni) Yokuts.
Chemehuevi, Karuk, Luiseño, Menominee, Northern Paiute, Washo, Wintu
and Wukchumne (Wikchamni) Yokuts.
Klallam, Klamath and Potawatomi.
Arapaho, Blackfoot, Lushootseed, Mississippi Choctaw, Mohawk, Navajo
and Washo.
Acoma Keresan, Cheyenne, Crow, Karuk and Ojibwe.
Cheyenne, Coeur d’Alene, Creek, Diegueño, Gwich’in, Hupa, Klallam,
Laguna Keresan, Navajo, Northern Paiute, Pawnee, Ponca, Rio Grande
Keresan, Sierra Miwok, Washo and Yup’ik.
Arikara, Atsina (Gros Ventre), Cherokee, Cheyenne, Choctaw, Cocopa, Coeur
d’Alene (in college extension course), Comanche, Creek, Hopi, Kutenai,
Lakota Sioux, Miami, Michif, Navajo, Ojibwe, Omaha, Potawatomi, Sahaptin
(Yakima), Shoshone, South-western Ojibwe (Anishinaabemowin), Spokane,
Tohono O’odham and Washo.
Choctaw, Dena’ina, Klallam, Potawatomi and Seneca.
Catawba, Chumash, Hanis, Kansa, Klamath, Massachusett-Narragansett (Wampanoag), Miami, Miluk, Mutsun, Rumsen, Siuslaw, Wiyot and
Wyandotte.
For example, Hualapai (Upland Yuman), Mississippi Choctaw and Mohawk.

111

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

With respect to language extinction and language endangerment, the
continental United States is one of the most severely affected regions
in the world. With 51 language families (including isolates), this area
represents 15 per cent of the world’s total linguistic diversity of about 350
language families (and isolates). However, nearly half the US’s linguistic
diversity is already gone, with 24 of these 51 families (and more than
115 individual languages) already extinct. Many of these will not survive
much longer – only about 20 languages from the approximately 155 that
are still spoken have children learning them in standard transmission
from one generation to the next. Furthermore, in several of these cases,
it is only some children (ever fewer as time goes on) who are learning to
speak them. It is almost certain that many of the surviving languages will
cease to have speakers in the very near future.
There are, on the other hand, numerous schemes to revitalize
many of these languages, some of which are proving highly successful
in increasing the numbers of speakers. It can only be hoped that more
of these will flourish, and that much greater effort will be put into such
initiatives in the future.

112

Canada and
Greenland
Mary Jane Norris

The endangered indigenous languages of Canada are those of Canada’s
Aboriginal peoples – the Inuit, First Nations and Métis. Their languages
reflect a diversity of distinctive histories, cultures and identities, linked
in many ways to family, community, the land and traditional knowledge.
For all three groups – Inuit (who live in the Arctic), First Nations (North
American Indian) and Métis (of mixed Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal
ancestry) – language is at the very core of their identity.
Aboriginal people are confronted with the fact that the majority
of their languages are in danger of disappearing. It has been estimated
that only about a third of the Aboriginal languages originally spoken in
Canada have a good chance of survival and that ‘Fewer than half of the
remaining languages are likely to survive for another fifty years’ (Kinkade,
1991). Kinkade indicates that at least five have been extinct for well over a
hundred years, while others have barely survived into the present century,
and at least two have become extinct within living memory. Today, the
various languages and their communities differ widely in their size, state
and levels of vitality and endangerment – some relatively flourishing,
others endangered and some close to extinction. From a longer-term
and more international perspective, even the largest and most viable of
Canada’s indigenous languages can be considered potentially vulnerable,
and hence all Aboriginal languages are included in this Atlas. According to
the 2006 Canadian census, about 222,000 people reported an Aboriginal
language as their mother tongue, that is, the first language they learned at
home in childhood and still understood at the time of the census.

Linguistic diversity and classifications
The diversity of Canada’s Aboriginal languages is reflected in their
classification and geographical distribution. The number of languages

113

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

can vary, depending on the system of linguistic classification used.

a single language, we consider it here as several, thus accounting for

All language classifications are hierarchical, and there are variations

most of the difference between their count and ours.) It is recognized

in approach. For example, some linguists suggest that about fifty

that there are variations in classifications, spellings and naming. Many

Aboriginal languages are spoken in Canada today (Kinkade, 1991). The

Aboriginal languages and communities have multiple names. Sometimes,

classification system used by Statistics Canada in the national censuses

these names are minor spelling variations of the same word (e.g. Ojibway,

organizes data on Aboriginal languages into eleven language families

Ojibwe, Ojibwa), but in other cases, the names are completely different

or isolates, comprising the language of the Inuit and the ‘Amerindian’

(Dene – Chipewyan; Nootka – Nuuchahnulth).

languages spoken by the First Nations and Métis peoples. Further

114

classification within the census data yields counts for about thirty-



five separately identified languages. The census classification system

Inuktitut, with a mother-tongue population of about 33,000 in 2006,

does not provide complete details, however, especially since smaller

is one of the three largest and most viable Aboriginal languages in

languages are grouped together owing to their small population counts.

Canada, along with Cree and Ojibway. Inuktitut refers to the languages

In contrast with the census data classification of thirty-five languages,

of the Inuit in Canada and Greenland. The Inuit language (the term

the most recent (fifteenth) edition of the Ethnologue estimates that

now used by the Territory of Nunavut in its legislation to refer to

Canada has seventy-eight indigenous living languages (i.e. spoken as a

the overarching language, rather than Inuktitut) varies across northern

first language) (Gordon, 2005).

Canada, so that numerous dialects or languages are recognized. For this

Languages of the Inuit

There is no definitive classification of Aboriginal languages in

Atlas, ten distinct languages are identified, spread across the four major

Canada. Where the Ethnologue gives a total of 78, the second edition

Inuit regions. These are the recently (1999) created territory of Nunavut,

of this Atlas identified 104, and in this third edition we list 86 (the

Nunavik in northern Quebec, the Inuvialuit region of the Northwest

decrease from the second to the third edition is attributable mainly to

Territories, and Nunatsiavut in northern Labrador.

the dropping of trade or pidgin languages and those that have been

While these dialects or languages can be interrelated or

extinct for more than a century). The classification system used here

overlapping, especially neighbouring dialects, they become increasingly

for Canada’s indigenous languages and communities is based on three

distinct over large distances so that a speaker of one dialect will have

major sources: Statistics Canada census data (supplemented with some

difficulty communicating with a speaker of another. The different dialects

language information from Indian and Northern Affairs Canada), the

can have different writing systems or orthographies. For example, in

previous edition of this Atlas and the Ethnologue (Gordon, 2005). It is

western Nunavut, the Natsilingmiutut language is written with syllabics,

most compatible with, though not identical to, that of the Ethnologue,

whereas Inuinnaqtun is written with a Roman orthography rather than

yielding eighty-six languages, plus two that are known to have become

syllabics. Further east in Labrador, a Roman orthography is used for

extinct within living memory. (Where the Ethnologue treats Inuktitut as

Nunatsiavummiutut.

Canada and Greenland

Greenland is aligned politically with Europe (via Denmark), but

(26,000). The Cree family of languages is the most widespread,

linguistically with North America. The three indigenous languages

ranging from Eastern Montagnais (Innu-aimun) in Labrador to Plains

belong to the Inuit language family. All three are relatively healthy, but

Cree in the foothills of the Rockies. The Ojibway family of languages

the population bases for the northern languages (Avanersuarmiutut or

ranges from the Ottawa language in southern Ontario to Saulteau in

Inuktun) and eastern language (Tunumiit oraasiat) are much smaller than

the Great Plains.

for the western language (Kalaallisut). Kalaallisut is one of the two official
languages of Greenland, along with Danish.

Similarly, the Athapaskan family of languages (with a total
mother-tongue population of about 20,000 in 2006) is widely distributed
throughout the north-west, including Han and Gwichin in the Yukon,

  	Languages of First Nations
and Métis

Carrier and Chilcotin in British Columbia. The Siouan family (Stoney,

First Nations languages are diverse, with the classification here of

Dakota and Lakota), with a total mother-tongue population of 6,000

seventy-four different languages across Canada. Overall, Cree is spoken

in 2006, is spoken largely in Alberta. The Iroquoian languages in

by the largest number of First Nations peoples, followed by Ojibway,

the east, which include Mohawk, are spoken in both Canada and

Oji-Cree and Montagnais-Naskapi. The Métis also speak a number of

the United States along the St Lawrence valley. Due to incomplete

these languages, mainly Cree, Dene, Ojibway and other Algonquin

enumeration of their reserves in the census, speaker counts are not

languages, including, to a lesser extent, Michif (Statistics Canada, 2008).

complete for the Iroquoian languages.

Dene, Dogrib and South Slavey in the Northwest Territories, and

Michif is a mixture of Cree and French, and is the traditional language

In sharp contrast to these larger languages, those in British

of the Red River Métis located in Manitoba and Saskatchewan. Overall,

Columbia are much smaller, having population bases that were never

the largest mother-tongue populations in 2006, based on Statistics

as widely dispersed as those of Algonquian and Athapaskan across

Canada language categories, include those of Cree (85,000), Ojibway

the more open central plains and eastern woodlands. This can be

(26,000), Oji-Cree (12,000) and Montagnais-Naskapi (11,000).

attributed to the province’s mountainous geography. The province

Geography influences the size and diversity of languages, such

has some of the smallest and most endangered Aboriginal mother-

that the languages with the largest mother-tongue populations also

tongue populations in Canada, including the Salish family (3,700), the

tend to be more widespread – particularly the large language families

Tsimshian family (2,400), the Wakashan family (1,200), Kutenai isolate

as categorized by Statistics Canada. The whole Algonquian family,

(155), Haida isolate (130) and Tlingit (90) (all 2006 figures). The province

with a total mother-tongue population of about 152,000 in 2006,

has the greatest diversity of languages, with twenty-seven of Canada’s

extends from the Atlantic to the Rockies, comprising a wide range

eighty-six languages (nearly a third) indigenous to British Columbia, yet

of languages such as Micmac in eastern Canada and Blackfoot in the

it accounts for only about 7 per cent of the country’s Aboriginal mother-

west, as well as the largest languages of Cree (85,000) and Ojibway

tongue population because of the small speaker populations.

115

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Historical background

in Canada, especially endangered ones, have undergone long-term

Language transmission from one generation to another is the major

language) populations, reflected in rising average ages and shrinking

factor in Aboriginal language survival and maintenance. As with other

populations of first-language speakers. Decreasing use in the home

minority languages, the continual exposure to dominant languages,

is reducing the chances of young people acquiring their traditional

with the need to use them in everyday life, is a powerful catalyst for the

language as a mother tongue.

declines in intergenerational transmission and mother-tongue (first-

decline of Aboriginal languages. The extent to which many have been

The long-term viability or continuity of an Aboriginal language

predominantly oral may also affect their survival. Many of Canada’s

is dependent on it being used on a daily basis and, ideally, as the one

Aboriginal languages are endangered and have already suffered great

‘spoken most often’ in the home (Royal Commission on Aboriginal

losses and setbacks, reflecting historical factors associated with the forces

Peoples, 1996). Declining language maintenance and home use are

of colonization and the legacy of the residential school system that saw

linked to the life cycle, and in particular to the transition from youth to

the prohibition of First Nation, Inuit and Métis languages and cultural

adulthood; young women appear the most affected in this transition

practices (Castellano and Archibald, 2008); wrongs the government of

(Norris, 1998). This is significant because it is during these years of

Canada acknowledged in its formal apology for the aftermath of the

transition that women leave home, enter the labour force, move

Indian Residential School system, 11 June, 2008 (http://pm.gc.ca/eng/

to a larger urban environment, marry or bring up young children –

media.asp?id=2149). The impact of the long-term erosion of these

potentially the next generation of speakers. Factors such as increasing

languages from generation to generation is evident today, with only

migration from and between Aboriginal communities and cities, and

about one in five of Canada’s 1.2 million Aboriginal people reporting an

linguistic intermarriage (all tending to be higher for women than men),

Aboriginal language as their mother tongue in the 2006 census.

and the prevailing influence of English and French in daily life, all
serve to erode home use (Norris, 2007).

Current status and recent trends
in language endangerment

116

Language differences between younger and older generations
of Aboriginal people in 2006 reflect long-term declines in
intergenerational transmission. Overall, among those aged 65 and
over, 33 per cent had an Aboriginal language as their mother tongue,

Children are the major source of growth for the Aboriginal mother-

in contrast to just 15 per cent of children and young people. This

tongue population in Canada. However, their percentage contribution

overall low proportion of first-language speakers among younger

to first-language speakers has declined over the long term, leading to

generations points to endangerment, given that in general a language

an ageing mother-tongue population. Over the past twenty-five years,

can be considered endangered if it is not learned by at least 30 per

from 1981 to 2006, census data show that many Aboriginal languages

cent of the children in a community (Wurm, 1996).

Canada and Greenland

Levels of language endangerment

population base; and viable with a large population (usually spoken in

Aboriginal languages vary significantly in their state, trends and outlook.

Languages that are viable or healthy and are being passed on to the

In his classification of Aboriginal languages in Canada, Kinkade (1991)

next generation of children have lower average speaker ages than

divided them into five groupings: already extinct; near extinction

endangered ones irrespective of population size.

isolated communities or well-organized ones with strong self-awareness).

(generally known by only a few elderly people); endangered (still spoken

The set of nine major evaluative factors recommended by

by enough people to make survival a possibility); viable, but with a small

UNESCO provides a comprehensive framework for assessing language

Table 1. Aboriginal languages in Canada: distributions of languages, communities

Level of endangerment
(2nd edn Atlas in
parentheses)

Distribution
of Aboriginal
languages in
Canada

Aboriginal
communities by
level of language
endangerment

First-language
speakers in
Aboriginal
communities

UNESCO 2003 description

no.

%

no.

%

no.

%

Vulnerable (potentially
endangered)

The language is used by
some children in all domains; it is used
by all children in limited domains.

24

28

444

50

134,000

90

Definitely endangered
(endangered)

The language is used mostly
by the parental generation and up.

14

16

132

15

8,200

5

Severely endangered
(seriously endangered)

The language is used mostly
by the grandparental generation and up.

16

19

230

26

5,700

4

Critically endangered
(moribund)

The language is used mostly by very few speakers,
of the great-grandparental generation.

32

37

80

9

1,200

1

86

100

886

100

149,100

100

Extinct (extinct)

No speakers exist.1

Total no. of languages/
communities/speakers
1. Two other languages have become extinct within living memory, c. 1930 and 1940.
Notes and sources:
•	Classification of eighty-six languages and their communities based on three major
sources: Statistics Canada data, 1996 and 2001 censuses; Wurm, 2001; Gordon, 2005;
and websites.

• 	Level of endangerment for each language: based primarily on analysis and development
of language indicators developed from customized retrievals of Statistics Canada 2001
census data, produced by Canadian Heritage.
• 	Mapping location of each language: based primarily on 2001 census data on geographical coordinates (latitude and longitude) of the community having the largest number
of speakers for the given language.

117

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

vitality and endangerment (UNESCO, 2003), while recognizing that no

Table 1 summarizes the overall distribution of the eighty-six

single factor can be used to assess a language’s vitality. The major

different languages, their Aboriginal communities, and numbers of first-

factor of ‘intergenerational language transmission’ is used here as

language (mother-tongue) speakers by levels of language endangerment.

the basis for determining degrees of endangerment, ranging from

Twenty-eight per cent of the languages are classified as vulnerable,

vulnerable to definitely endangered, severely endangered, critically

although several are healthy or viable, with young generations of

endangered and extinct.

speakers. The remaining 72 per cent are endangered, and over a third

For the Aboriginal languages in Canada, 2001 census language

are critically endangered. Aboriginal languages are vulnerable in half the

data collected by Statistics Canada was the most comprehensive source

communities analysed and are endangered in the other half. In almost

for assessing their level of endangerment, including the development

one in ten communities, languages are critically endangered. Although

and analysis of community-level measures. For most of the country’s

nearly three out of four Aboriginal languages are endangered, they

eighty-six languages, indicators including the average age of first-

account for only 10 per cent of the speakers. In other words, 90 per cent

language speakers combined with the absolute number of speakers

of first-language speakers speak 28 per cent of Aboriginal languages

(UNESCO Factor 2) were used to assign a level of endangerment to each

(the more viable ones).

language.
It is important to note that a level of endangerment is assigned



Endangerment of Inuit languages

to a given Aboriginal language based on the characteristics of first-

The Inuktitut family of languages is overall one of the most viable

language speakers residing in the Aboriginal communities associated

Aboriginal languages in Canada, with a relatively large speaker population

with that particular language. (Also, detailed language classifications,

that includes children. However, the state of the Inuit language varies

dependent on the location of Aboriginal communities, could not be

across regions: it is strongest in Nunavut and Nunavik (consistent with

assigned to speakers outside these communities.) Although most first-

Statistics Canada, 2008). Nunatsiavummiutut (spoken in Labrador) and

language speakers tend to live in predominantly Aboriginal communities,

Inuinnaqtun (spoken in western Nunavut and Inuvialuit) are definitely

others live outside such communities in cities and rural areas. The 2001

endangered. Further to the west, Inupiatun and Siglitun in the Northwest

census included language statistics for 886 communities across Canada,

Territories are severely endangered. An eleventh Inuktitut dialect, Rigolet

representing 149,000 persons with an Aboriginal mother tongue (first-

in Labrador, is critically endangered with very few speakers.

language speakers). This accounts for nearly three-quarters of the total
living outside Aboriginal communities, close to 39,000 lived in major

  	Endangerment of First Nations
and Métis languages

cities across Canada, while the remaining 15,000 lived in smaller towns

The seventy-six languages spoken by the First Nations and Métis vary

and rural areas.

significantly in their strength. The vast majority of these languages

mother-tongue population of 203,000. Among first-language speakers

118

Canada and Greenland

(76 per cent) are endangered, and of these fifty-eight endangered

languages owing to their small numbers (e.g. Michif is grouped under

languages, thirty-one are critically endangered, fifteen severely and

‘Algonquian not included elsewhere’).

twelve definitely. The remaining eighteen least endangered or strongest

Some examples of languages without any community-based

languages are classified as vulnerable, with children still speaking the

speakers include Bungee, Cayuga, Han, Potawatomi, Squamish and

language (to varying degrees). This latter category includes some of the

Tagish. Examples of critically endangered languages include Athapaskan

largest viable languages from the major Algonquian, Athapaskan and

(Assiniboine, Sarcee, Sekani), Salish (Sechelt, Bella Coola, Comox/

Siouan language families. For example, such languages include all six

Sliammon), Wakashan (Haisla, Kwak’wala), Tshimsian, Haida, Tlingit and

Cree languages (Plains and Swampy Cree being the largest), Eastern

Algonquian (Western Abenaki).

Montagnais, Naskapi, some Ojibway (North-Western Ojibwe), Oji-Cree,
Dene and Stoney.

Finally, two languages listed here are known to have become
extinct within living memory: Pentlatch (1940) and Tsetsaut (c. 1930).

The category of definitely endangered encompasses generally
smaller languages, spoken mostly by parental and older generations.
It includes several Athapaskan languages (Beaver, Chilcotin, North

Trends in revitalization

and South Slavey, Northern Tutchone), Dakota, Central Ojibwe,

There are signs of revitalization among Canada’s endangered languages,

Blackfoot, Malecite, Mohawk, Okanagan and Shuswap. The severely

especially among young people who are showing an interest in

endangered languages, characterized by older first-language

learning the traditional but endangered languages of their parents or

speakers mostly from the grandparental generation, include some

grandparents as second languages. Second-language transmission is

Athapaskan languages (such as Carrier, Gitskan, Gwich’in and Kaska),

increasingly a necessary response for endangered languages, reflecting

Salish (Halkomelem, Lillooet, Straits Salish and Thompson), and

two phenomena: first, that many mother-tongue populations are ageing

others such as Maniwaki Algonquin, Eastern Ojibwe, Ottawa, Nisga’a,

beyond child-bearing years; and, second, that for most children the ideal

Nootka and Kutenai.

family and community conditions for mother-tongue transmission are

Most of the thirty-one critically endangered languages, with

becoming the exception rather than the norm. Demographic data show

very few first-language speakers and/or speakers only of the great-

that the children most likely to learn an Aboriginal language as a second

grandparental generation, are from a variety of language families. Most

language are from linguistically mixed families and live in urban areas

have speaker populations of 100 or fewer, while others have no reported

(Norris, 2008; Norris and Jantzen, 2003).

speakers within the community. For languages without community

In both the 2001 and 2006 censuses, second-language learners

speakers, it is difficult to determine whether there may be other speakers

accounted for a significant percentage of the speaking population among

residing outside the community. In some cases, speakers may have

some of the most endangered languages. In 2001 they accounted for

been reported in the census but could have been grouped with other

over half the speakers of Tlingit, Haida and smaller Salish languages. In

119

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

younger age groups, second-language learners make up the majority

with elders, the development of orthographies, dictionaries and lexicons

of endangered language speakers. Among children under the age of

for over twenty-five endangered languages, and promoting the use of

15 who could speak an endangered language in 2001, 71 per cent had

Michif in Métis communities. Other federal initiatives and programmes

learned it as a second language (Norris, 2007).

support educational and learning resources for First Nations, Inuit

The language development of today’s Aboriginal youth has

and Métis languages across Canada in Aboriginal communities and

significant implications for the future prospects of Canada’s Aboriginal

schools, on reservations, in northern and remote locations, and in urban

languages, particularly the endangered ones. Second-language

areas (First Nations and Inuit Cultural Education Centres, First Nations

acquisition by today’s young people reflects an increasing interest

SchoolNet and Aboriginal Head Start).

and desire to learn their traditional languages, and more frequent

Various Aboriginal language organizations, institutions and

opportunities for renewal and support. Even in the case of relatively

communities are developing language expertise and teaching resources

strong languages like Inuktitut, Inuit youth say that they do not want to

such as the Community Linguist Certificate programme of the Canadian

lose their ability to speak the language well, recognizing the importance

Indigenous Languages and Literacy Development Institute (CILLDI) and

of support through family, community and education, with opportunities

the Certificate programme for Inuktitut interpreters operated by Nunavut

to learn, hear and use it (Tulloch, 2005).

Arctic College. Other organizations include First Peoples’ Heritage,
Language and Culture Council and FirstVoices, which provides online

Safeguarding Aboriginal languages:
developments, programmes and policies

of British Columbia.
The broadcast media are also expanding the awareness and
learning of Aboriginal languages across Canada, including the northern

Efforts to safeguard Aboriginal languages are relevant to several of

communities. The Aboriginal Peoples Television Network (APTN) is

the UNESCO factors of language vitality and endangerment, including

broadcast nationally with programming by, for and about Aboriginal

domains of language use, new domains and media, materials for

peoples, with almost 30 per cent of its programmes in a number of

language education and literacy, language attitudes and government

Aboriginal languages.

policies, and language documentation (UNESCO, 2003).

120

electronic language resources to First Nations throughout the province

In both Nunavut and the Northwest Territories, Aboriginal

The Canadian Government created the Aboriginal Languages

languages have official status. The Official Languages Act of Nunavut

Initiative (ALI) in 1998 to fund a variety of community-based language

(2008) establishes Inuit as an official language along with English and

projects such as language nests, master-apprentice programmes, language

French, while the Inuit Language Protection Act (2008) provides a legal

learning resources, documentation and archiving, communications and

statement of the inherent right of the Inuit in Nunavut to use their

the media. Activities include the recording and transcribing of interviews

language. In the Northwest Territories, official Aboriginal languages

Canada and Greenland

include Chipewyan, Cree, Gwich’in, Inuinnaqtun, Inuktitut, Inuvialuktun,



North Slavey, South Slavey and Tåîchô.

The author wishes to thank Shelley Tulloch for her invaluable comments

Acknowledgements

Many other examples of efforts to safeguard endangered

and guidance concerning Inuit languages and dialects, Lorna Jantzen

Aboriginal languages in Canada could be given, pointing to a generally

of Canadian Heritage and Statistics Canada for support in providing

positive trend. More information is available online from various United

access to Statistics Canada census data for this project, Dan Beavon of

Nations meetings, such as the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues

Indian and Northern Affairs Canada for supporting the use of previous

(http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/en/session_seventh.html) and the

census-based data analyses, and Stephen W. Adcock for development

International Expert Group Meeting on Indigenous Languages (http://

of the database and documentation on the classification of Aboriginal

www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/en/EGM_IL.html).

languages and their communities.

121

Contributors

Christopher Moseley (University College, London) is a specialist in Baltic
languages and is the editor of the Journal of the Foundation for
Endangered Languages. Since retiring from the BBC in 2005,
he has edited the Encyclopedia of the World’s Endangered
Languages (London/New York, Routledge 2007) and co-edited
the Atlas of the World’s Languages (London: Routledge 1994 and
2007).

•••
Willem Adelaar (Leiden University, The Netherlands) is a specialist in the
Amerindian languages in Latin America. He is the author of The
Languages of the Andes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
2007).
Herman Batibo (University of Botswana) is a specialist in African
languages. He co-edited Botswana: The Future of the Minority
Languages (Frankfurt: Peter Lang Publishers 2000) and is the author
of Language Decline and Death in Africa: Causes, Consequences
and Challenges (Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters 2005).
Stuart Blackburn (School of Oriental and African Studies, University of
London) is a specialist in South Asian studies. His focus is on oral
narratives, especially oral histories and ritual texts in India. He has
written extensively on Tamil and Himalayan oral traditions and
histories.
David Bradley (La Trobe University, Australia) is a specialist in SouthEast, East and South Asian languages, especially those of the
Tibeto-Burman group, and has authored numerous articles and
books over the past decades. He is the co-editor of Language
Endangerment and Language Maintenance (London: RoutledgeCurzon 2002).

Contributors

Matthias Brenzinger (University of Cologne, Germany) is a specialist in
African languages and is co-editor of the AAP (Afrikanistische

and education, both from a linguistic and an anthropological
perspective.

Arbeitspapiere). Among other publications, he has edited

Tjeerd de Graaf (Mercator European Research Centre on Multilingualism

Endangered Languages in Africa (Cologne: Rüdiger Koeppe 1998)

and Language Learning) is a specialist in Slavic and East Asian

and Language Diversity Endangered (Berlin/New York: Mouton de

languages and literatures. He has written on endangered

Gruyter 2007).

languages in the border areas of Japan and Russia.

Lyle Campbell (University of Utah, USA) is a specialist in American

Marleen Haboud (Pontificia Universidad Católica del Ecuador) is a

Indian languages, especially those of Mesoamerica. He won the

specialist in the indigenous languages of Ecuador. She is the

Linguistic Society of America’s 'Bloomfield Book Award' for his

author of Quichua y Castellano en los Andes Ecuatorianos: los

book American Indian Languages: the Historical Linguistics of

efectos de un contacto prolongado (Quito: Abya-Yala 1998).

Native America (Oxford: Oxford University Press 1997).
Gérard Diffloth (formerly of the University of Chicago) is a specialist
in Austro-Asiatic languages and has written extensively on the
languages of the Mon-Khmer family.
Yamina El Kirat El Allane (Université Mohamed V, Rabat) is a specialist in
North African languages and has published a number of articles
on the Amazigh language in Morocco.
Hakim Elnazarov (The Institute of Ismaili Studies, London) is a specialist
in Central Asian studies. He has published articles on such topics
as multilingualism in Pamir, endangered languages and education
in Tajikistan, and Ismailis in Central Asia.

Daniel Franck Idiata (Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique
et Technologique, Gabon) specializes primarily in language
acquisition and language policies. He has published extensively on
these subjects, as well as on the documentation and maintenance
of the languages of Gabon.
Juha Janhunen (University of Helsinki, Finland) is a specialist in Siberian
and north-east Asian languages. He is the author of Manchuria: An
Ethnic History (Helsinki: Finno-Ugrian Society 1996).
Yolanda Lastra (UNAM, Mexico) is a specialist in Mexican and Central
American languages. She co-edited Panorama de los estudios de
las lenguas indígenas de México, I, II (Quito: Ediciones Abya-Yala
1994, 1995).

Gustavo Solis Fonseca (Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos,

Salem Mezhoud (King’s College, University of London) is a specialist in

Lima) is a specialist in Amerindian languages. He has authored

North African languages and, in particular, the linguistic rights of

books and articles on the languages of Peruvian Amazonia,

minority and indigenous groups. He is currently a consultant for

Amerindian linguistics, and linguistic diversity in Peru.

NGOs, UN Agencies and the media.

Bruna Franchetto (Museu Nacional, Departamento de Antropologia, Rio

Denny Moore (Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technological

de Janeiro) is a specialist in the indigenous languages of Brazil.

Development) is a specialist in Amazonian Indian languages. He

She has published widely on indigenous languages, cultures

works closely with Brazilian students to develop literacy in the

123

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

native language and uses language to record traditional culture

A Morphological Dictionary of Tundra Nenets (Helsinki: Lexica

and knowledge.

Societatis Fenno-Ugricae 26 1998).

Mary Jane Norris (Strategic Research and Analysis Directorate, Indian

Udaya Narayan Singh (Central Institute of Indian Languages, Mysore,

and Northern Affairs Canada) is a specialist in the Aboriginal

India) is a reputed poet, playwright and essayist in Maithili and

languages of Canada. She contributed the chapter 'Aboriginal

Bengali. He has published collections of poems and plays in

peoples in Canada: demographic and linguistic perspectives'

Maithili, as well as books of literary essays and poetry in Bengali.

to the book Visions of the Heart: Canadian Aboriginal Issues
(Toronto: Harcourt Canada 2000).
Jean Robert Opgenort (ISM eCompany) is a specialist in the languages

the dialect of Muscat, Oman, and surveyed the language of Jabal
Razih in 1979.

of the Greater Himalayan region. He has written two grammars of

Darrell T. Tryon (Australian National University) is a specialist in

different Kiranti languages (the Wambule and Jero languages in

Austronesian languages, particularly the Austronesian languages

eastern Nepal).

of Melanesia with emphasis on Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands.

Naomi Palosaari (Center for American Indian Languages, University of

He co-edited the Comparative Austronesian Dictionary (Berlin:

Utah, USA) is a researcher focusing primarily on the documentation

Mouton de Gruyter 1995) and the Atlas of the Languages of

and description of the native languages of North America and

Intercultural Communication (Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter 1997).

Mexico.
Suwilai Premsrirat (Mahidol University, Thailand) is a specialist in ethnic
minority languages in Thailand and mainland South-East Asia, with
a particular focus on Mon-Khmer languages. She co-edited The
Thesaurus and Dictionary Series of Khmu Dialects in Southeast
Asia (2002).
Chris Rogers (University of Utah, USA) is a graduate student working
on American Indian languages, in particular, Xinka, Mixtec and
Amazonian languages. He is currently working on a project on
comparative Xinkan and is the author of Una descripción de la
gramática de los idiomas Xinkas (2008).
Tapani Salminen (University of Helsinki, Finland) is a specialist in

124

Bonnie Stalls (University of Southern California, USA) is a specialist in

Finno-Ugrian studies and served as editor of the Journal de la
Société Finno-Ougrienne from 1995 to 2004. He is the author of

Michael Walsh (University of Sydney) is a specialist in Australian Aboriginal
languages. He co-edited Language and Culture in Aboriginal
Australia (Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press 1993, 2005).

Bibliography

Introduction
Fishman, J. 1991. Reversing Language Shift: Theory and Practice of
Assistance to Threatened Languages. Clevedon, UK, Multilingual
Matters.
— . 2000. Can Threatened Languages Be Saved: Reversing Language
Shift, Revisited: A 21st-Century Perspective. Clevedon, UK,
Multilingual Matters.
Lewis, M. P. (ed.). 2009. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 16th edn.
Dallas, Tex., SIL International.
Moseley, C. (ed.). 2007. Encyclopedia of the World’s Endangered
Languages. London/New York, Routledge.
UNESCO. 2003. Language Vitality and Endangerment. Document
submitted to the International Expert Meeting on UNESCO
Programme Safeguarding of Endangered Languages, Paris,
10–12 March 2003. http://www.unesco.org/culture/ich/doc/
src/00120-EN.pdf (Accessed 8 March 2009.)
Wurm, S. (ed.). 1996. Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger, 1st edn.
Paris, UNESCO Publishing.
— . 2001. Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger, 2nd edn. Paris,
UNESCO Publishing.

Cartographic representation of the world’s
endangered languages
Lewis, M. P. (ed.). 2009. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 16th edn.
Dallas, Tex., SIL International.
Moseley, C. and Asher, R. E. (eds). 1994. Atlas of the World’s Languages.
London, Routledge.
UNESCO. 1993. Red Book of Languages in Danger of Disappearing.
Paris, UNESCO Publishing.

125

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Sub-Saharan Africa

LEA2006/assets/docs/kamei_paper.pdf (Accessed 10 February

Batibo, H. M. 2005. Language Decline and Death in Africa: Causes,

2009.)

Consequences, and Challenges. Clevedon, UK, Multilingual
Matters.
Blench, R. and Nyst, V. 2003. An unreported African sign language in
northeast Nigeria. Ogmios: Newsletter of the Foundation for
Endangered Languages, Vol. 22.

blacksmiths and leatherworkers in the diaspora. M. Brenzinger
(ed.), Mande Languages and Linguistics, pp. 253–66.
Lewis, M. P. (ed.). 2009. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 16th edn.
Dallas, Tex., SIL International.

Brenzinger, M. (ed.). 1992. Language Death. Factual and Theoretical

Mous, M. 2003. Loss of linguistic diversity in Africa. M. Janse and S. Tol

Explorations with Special Reference to East Africa. Berlin/New

(eds), Language Death and Language Maintenance: Theoretical,

York, Mouton de Gruyter.

Practical and Descriptive Approaches. Amsterdam, Phil., John

— . 1998. Endangered Languages in Africa. Cologne, Ruediger
Koeppe.
— . 2006. Language maintenance and shift. K. Brown (ed.), The
Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, 2nd edn, Vol. 6.
Amsterdam, Elsevier Science.
— . (ed.). 2007. Language Diversity Endangered. Berlin/New York,
Mouton de Gruyter.
Cronk, L. 2004. From Mukogodo to Maasai: Ethnicity and Cultural Change
in Kenya. Boulder, Colo., Westview.
Dimmendaal, G. and Voeltz, F. K. E. 2007. Africa. C. Moseley (ed.),
Encyclopedia of the World’s Endangered Languages. London/
New York, Routledge, pp. 579–634.
Greenberg, J. 1963. The Languages of Africa. Part II of the International
Journal of American Linguistics, Vol. 29, No. 1.
Kamei, N. 2006. The birth of langue des signes franco-africaine: Creole

126

Kastenholz, R. 1998. Language shift and language death among Mande

Benjamins, pp. 157–70.
Nettle, D. and Romaine, S. 2000. Vanishing Voices: The Extinction of the
World’s Languages. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Nyst, V. 2007. A Descriptive Analysis of Adamorobe Sign Language.
Ghana/Utrecht, LOT.
Zelealem, L. 2004. The fate of endangered languages in Ethiopia. J.
A. Argenter and R. M. Brown (eds), On the Margins of Nations:
Endangered Languages and Linguistic Rights. Proceedings
of the VIII FEL Conference, Barcelona (Catalonia), Spain, 1–3
October 2004. Bath, UK, Foundation for Endangered Languages,
pp. 35–45.

North Africa and the Middle East
Basset, A. 1952. La langue berbère. London/New York, Oxford University
Press.

ASL in West and Central French-speaking Africa. Languages and

Chaker, S. 1989. Berbères aujourd’hui. Paris, L’Harmattan.

Education in Africa conference (LEA 2006). (Conference paper.)

— . 1995. Linguistique berbère: études de syntaxe et de diachronie.

Oslo, University of Oslo. http://www.pfi.uio.no/konferanse/

Paris/Louvain, Editions Peeters.

Bibliography

Cohen, D. 1975. Le parler arabe des juifs de Tunis. Paris/The Hague,
Mouton.
Doutté, E. and Gautier, E.-F. 1913. Enquête sur la dispersion de la langue
berbère en Algérie. Algiers, A. Jourdan.

conference, Barcelona (Catalonia), Spain, 1–3 October 2004. Bath,
UK, Foundation for Endangered Languages.
— . 2005. Salvation through migration: immigrant communities
as engine rooms for the survival and revival of the Tamazight

El Kirat El Allame, Y. 2003. Language endangerment in Morocco: the case

(Berber) language. N. Crawhall and N. Ostler (eds), Creating

of the Beni Iznassen Amazigh language. Paper presented at the

Outsiders: Endangered Languages, Migration and Marginalisation.

International Expert Meeting on Safeguarding of Endangered

Proceedings of the IX FEL Conference, Stellenbosch, South Africa,

Languages, UNESCO Headquarters, Paris, 10–12 March 2003.

18–20 November 2005. Bath, UK, Foundation for Endangered

— . 2008. Bilingualism, language teaching, language transmission

Languages.

and language endangerment: the case of Amazigh in Morocco.

UNCERO. 1999. Report of an inter-agency assessment mission to the

T. De Graaf, N. Ostler and R. Salverda (eds), Endangered

Nuba Mountains of South Kordofan, Sudan. United Nations

Languages and Language Learning. Proceedings of the XII FEL

Coordinator for Emergency and Relief Operations in Sudan.

Conference, Fryske Akademy, It Aljemint, Ljouwert/Leeuwarden,

http://www.reliefweb.int/rw/RWFiles1999.nsf/FilesByRW

The Netherlands, 24–27 September 2008. Bath, UK, Foundation

DocUNIDFileName/OCHA-64C4NF-sudan.pdf/$File/sudan.pdf

for Endangered Languages.

(Accessed 10 February 2009.)

Gordon, R. G. (ed.). 2005. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 15th
edn. Dallas, Tex., SIL International. Online version: http://www.
ethnologue.com (Accessed 10 February 2009.)
Greenberg, J. 1963. The Languages of Africa. Part II of the International
Journal of American Linguistics, Vol. 29, No. 1.
Hagège, C. 2000. Halte à la mort des langues. Paris, Odile Jacob.
Lewis, M. P. (ed.). 2009. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 16th edn.
Dallas, Tex., SIL International.
Mammeri, M. 1984. L’ahellil du gourara. Paris, Editions de la Maison des
Sciences de l’Homme.
Mezhoud, S. 2004. Endangered languages and linguistic rights: an
overview of linguistic research and international law. J. A. Argenter
and R. M. Brown (eds), On the Margins of Nations: Endangered
Languages and Linguistic Rights. Proceedings of the VIII FEL

Europe and the Caucasus
Cerquiglini, B., Alessio, M. and Sibille, J. 2003. Les langues de la France.
Paris, Presses Universitaires de France.
Gordon, R. G. (ed.). 2005. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 15th
edn. Dallas, Tex., SIL International. Online version: http://www.
ethnologue.com (Accessed 10 February 2009.)
Institut Jazykoznanija RAN. 1997, 2001, 2005. Jazyki Rossijskoj Federacii
i sosednih gosudarstv: enciklopedija [Languages of the Russian
Federation and Neighbouring States: Encyclopedia]. Moscow,
Nauka.
Krenn, G. and Okuka, M. 2004. Lexikon der Sprachen des europäischen
Ostens. Klagenfurt, Wieser.

127

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Lewis, M. P. (ed.). 2009. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 16th edn.
Dallas, Tex., SIL International.
Moseley, C. (ed.). 2007. Encyclopedia of the World’s Endangered
Languages. London/New York, Routledge.
Neroznak, V. (ed.). 1994, 2002. Krasnaya kniga yazykov narodov Rossii
[Red Book of the Languages of Russia]. Moscow, Academia.
— . 2002. Gosudarstvennye i titul’nye jazyki Rossii [State and Titular
Languages of Russia]. Moscow, Academia.

Western and Central Asia
Backstrom, P. C. and Radloff, C. F. 1992. Languages of Northern Areas.
Islamabad, National Institute of Pakistan Studies, Quaid-i-Azam
University and SIL International. (Sociolinguistic Survey of Northern
Pakistan, Vol. 2.) http://www.sil.org/sociolx/pubs/32840_SSNP02.
pdf (Accessed 10 February 2009.)

K. Jettmar and L. Edelberg (eds), Cultures of the Hindukush:
Selected Papers from the Hindu-Kush Cultural Conference held at
Moesgård 1970. Wiesbaden, F. Steiner, pp. 1–10.
van Driem, G. 2007. South Asia and the Middle East. C. Moseley (ed.),
Encyclopedia of the World’s Endangered Languages. London/
New York, Routledge, pp. 283–348.

North-east Asia
Georg, S. 2003. Monguor. J. Janhunen (ed.), The Mongolic Languages.
London, Routledge.
Janhunen, J. 1996. Ethnic implications of the Sino-Russian border. S.
Minagawa and O. Ieda (eds), Socio-Economic Dimensions of the
Changes in the Slavic-Eurasian World. Sapporo, Japan, Slavic
Research Center, Hokkaido University, pp. 199–220.
— . 2005. Tungusic: an endangered language family in Northeast

Clifton, J. M. (ed). 2005. Studies in Languages of Tajikistan. Dushanbe/

Asia. D. Bradley (ed.), Language Endangerment in the Sinosphere.

St Petersburg, National State University of Tajikistan/North Eurasia

International Journal of the Sociology of Language, Vol. 173.

Group, SIL International.

Berlin, Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 37–54.

Decker, K. D. 1992. Languages of Chitral. Islamabad, National Institute
of Pakistan Studies, Quaid-i-Azam University and SIL International.

Johanson, L. 2001. Discoveries on the Turkic Linguistic Map. Stockholm,
Svenska forskningsinstitutet i Istanbul.

(Sociolinguistic Survey of Northern Pakistan, Vol. 5.) http://www.

Shoji, H. and Janhunen, J. (eds). 1997. Northern Minority Languages:

sil.org/sociolx/pubs/32850_SSNP05.pdf (Accessed 10 February

Problems of Survival. Osaka, National Museum of Ethnology.

2009.)

(Senri Ethnological Studies, Vol. 44.)

Elnazarov. A. 2007. Multilingualism in Pamir: challenges of preservation

128

Morgenstierne, G. 1974. Languages of Nuristan and surrounding regions.

and revitalization. E. Elangaiyan (ed.), Vital Voices: Endangered

India and the Himalayan chain

Languages and Multilingualism. Proceedings of the X FEL

Burling, R. 2003. The Tibeto-Burman languages of northeastern India.

Conference, CIIL, Mysore, India, 25–27 October 2006. Mysore,

G. Thurgood and R. J. LaPolla (eds), The Sino-Tibetan Languages.

India, Central Institute of Indian Languages, pp. 153–58.

London, Routledge, pp. 169–91.

Bibliography

Gordon, R. G. (ed.). 2005. Ethnologue: Languages of the World,

— . 2001. Languages of the Himalayas: an Ethnolinguistic Handbook

15th edn. Dallas, Tex., SIL International. Online version: http://

of the Greater Himalayan Region Containing an Introduction to

www.ethnologue.com (Accessed 10 February 2009.)

the Symbiotic Theory of Language. Leiden/New York, Brill.

King, J. T. 2008. A grammar of Dhimal. Ph.D. thesis, University of Leiden,
the Netherlands.
Krauss, M. 2007. Classification and terminology for degrees of language
endangerment. C. Moseley (ed.), Encyclopedia of the World’s
Endangered Languages. London/New York, Routledge, pp. 1–8.
Lewis, M. P. (ed.). 2009. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 16th edn.

— . 2007a. South Asia and the Middle East. C. Moseley (ed.),
Encyclopedia of the World’s Endangered Languages. London/
New York, Routledge, pp. 283–347.
— . 2007b. Endangered languages of South Asia. M. Brenzinger
(ed.), Language Diversity Endangered. Berlin, Mouton de Gruyter,
pp. 303–41.

Dallas, Tex., SIL International.
Opgenort, J. R. 2004. A Grammar of Wambule: Grammar, Lexicon, Texts

South-East Asia, southern China and Taiwan

and Cultural Survey of a Kiranti Tribe of Eastern Nepal. Leiden,

Bradley, D. 2002. Language attitudes: the key factor in language

Brill. (Brill’s Tibetan Studies Library, Vol. 5/2, Languages of the

maintenance. D. Bradley and M. Bradley (eds), Language

Greater Himalayan Region.)

Endangerment and Language Maintenance. London, Routledge-

— . 2005. A Grammar of Jero: with a Historical Comparative Study of
the Kiranti Languages. Leiden, Brill. (Brill’s Tibetan Studies Library,
Vol. 5/3, Languages of the Greater Himalayan Region.)

Curzon, pp. 1–10.
— . 2005. Sanie and language loss in China. D. Bradley (ed.),
Language Endangerment in the Sinosphere. International Journal

Plaisier, H. 2007. A Grammar of Lepcha. Leiden, Brill.

of the Sociology of Language, Vol. 173, pp. 159–76. Berlin/New

Post, M. W. 2007. A grammar of Galo. Ph.D. thesis, La Trobe University,

York, Mouton de Gruyter.

Melbourne.
Turin, M. 2006. A Grammar of the Thangmi Language. Leiden, Brill.
(Brill’s Tibetan Studies Library, Vol. 5/6, Languages of the Greater
Himalayan Region.)
— . Linguistic Diversity and the Preservation of Endangered
Languages. A Case Study from Nepal. Kathmandu, International
Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD).
van Driem, G. 1991. Report on the First Linguistic Survey of Bhutan.
Thimphu, Royal Government of Bhutan.

— . [section editor]. 2007a. East and South-East Asia. R. E. Asher
and C. Moseley (eds), Atlas of the World’s Languages, 2nd edn.
London/New York, Routledge, pp. 157–209.
— . 2007b. Language endangerment in China and Mainland Southeast
Asia. M. Brenzinger (ed.), Language Diversity Endangered. Berlin,
Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 278–303.
— . 2007c. East and Southeast Asia. C. Moseley (ed.), Encyclopedia
of the World’s Endangered Languages. London/New York,
Routledge, pp. 349–422.

129

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Brassett, P. R. and Brassett, C. 2005. Diachronic and synchronic overview
of the Tujia language of Central South China. D. Bradley (ed.),

(ed.), Language Diversity Endangered. Berlin, Mouton de Gruyter,
pp. 374–90.

Language Endangerment in the Sinosphere. International Journal
of the Sociology of Language, Vol. 173, pp. 75–97. Berlin/New

Greater Pacific area

York, Mouton de Gruyter.

Foley, W. A. 1986. The Papuan Languages of New Guinea. Cambridge,

Jacquesson, F. 2001. Person-marking in TB languages, Northeastern
India. Linguistics of the Tibeto-Burman Area, Vol. 24, pp. 113–44.
Lewis, M. P. (ed.). 2009. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 16th edn.
Dallas, Tex., SIL International.
Pelkey, J. 2005. Puzzling over Phula: toward the synthesis and statement
of a sub-branch. Linguistics of the Tibeto-Burman Area, Vol. 28,
pp. 43–78.
— . 2007. Muji’s mirrored merger: Correlative redistribution of checked

Cambridge University Press.
Wurm, S. A. and Hattori, S. (eds). 1981–83. Language Atlas of the
Pacific Area. Canberra, Australian Academy of the Humanities
in collaboration with the Japan Academy, Stuttgart, Geocenter
Publications.
Wurm, S. A., Mühlhäusler, P. and Tryon, D. T. (eds). 1996. Atlas of
Languages of Intercultural Communication in the Pacific, Asia and
the Americas. Berlin, Mouton de Gruyter.

tone classes in a newly defined Burmic cluster. Mon-Khmer Studies
Journal, Vol. 37, N°1, pp. 179–96.
Person, K. 2005. Language revitalization or dying gasp? Language

AIATSIS (Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander

preservation efforts among the Bisu of Northern Thailand.

Studies). 2005. National Indigenous Languages Survey (NILS)

D. Bradley (ed.), Language Endangerment in the Sinosphere.

Report. Canberra, Dept of Communications, Information

International Journal of the Sociology of Language, Vol. 173,

Technology and the Arts. http://www.arts.gov.au/indigenous/

pp. 117–41. Berlin/New York, Mouton de Gruyter.

national_indigenous_languages_survey_report_2005 (Accessed 8

Shearer, W. and Sun, H. 2002. Speakers of the Non-Han Languages and
Dialects of China. Lewiston, NY/Queenston, Ontario/Lampeter,
Wales, Edwin Mellen.

130

Australia

March 2009.)
Amery, R. 2000. Warrabarna Kaurna! Reclaiming an Australian Language.
Lisse, Exton, Penn., Swets & Zeitlinger.

Wurm, S. 2007a. Australasia and the Pacific. C. Moseley (ed.) Encyclopedia

— . 2002. Indigenous language programs in South Australian schools:

of the World’s Endangered Languages. London/New York,

issues, dilemmas and solutions. Paper commissioned by the NSW

Routledge, pp. 425–577.

Office of the Board of Studies. http://www.boardofstudies.nsw.

— . 2007b. Threatened languages in the Western Pacific Area from
Taiwan to, and including, Papua New Guinea. M. Brenzinger

edu.au/aboriginal_research/pdf_doc/indig_lang_sa_amery.pdf
(Accessed 8 March 2009.)

Bibliography

Hercus, L. A. 1994. A Grammar of the Arabana-Wangkangurru Language,

Mühlhäusler, P. and Damania, R. 2004. Economic Costs and Benefits of

Lake Eyre Basin, South Australia. Canberra, Australian National

Australian Indigenous Languages: Discussion Paper. Adelaide,

University.

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Services.

Hosking, D. F., Lonsdale, T. J., Troy, J. F., and Walsh, M. J. 2000.
Strong Language, Strong Culture: New South Wales Strategic

NT. 2005. Indigenous Languages and Culture in Northern Territory
Schools Report 2004–2005. Northern Territory.

Language Study: Final Report and Strategy Action Plan. Canberra,

NSW. 2003. Aboriginal Languages. Mandatory and Elective Courses. K-10

Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies

Syllabus. Sydney, Board of Studies New South Wales. http://www.

(AIATSIS).

boardofstudies.nsw.edu.au/syllabus_sc/pdf_doc/ab_language_

James, B. 2009. Time and tide in the Crocodile Islands: Yan-nhangu
marine identity, economy and history. Ph.D. thesis, Australian
National University, Canberra.
Krauss, M. 2007. Classification and terminology for degrees of language
endangerment. C. Moseley (ed.), Encyclopedia of the World’s
Endangered Languages. London/New York, Routledge.
McConvell, P. and Thieberger, N. 2002. State of Indigenous Languages
in Australia – 2001 (SOIL). Canberra, Department of the Environ­
ment and Heritage. http://www.environment.gov.au/soe/2001/
publications/technical/pubs/indigenous-languages.pdf (Accessed
8 March 2009.)
McKay, G. 2007. Language maintenance, shift – and planning. G. Leitner
and I. Malcolm (eds), The Habitat of Australia’s Aboriginal
Languages: Past, Present and Future. Berlin, Mouton de Gruyter,
pp. 101–30.
Miyaoka, O. 2007. Mass language extinction and documentation: the
race against time. O. Miyaoka, O. Sakiyama and M. E. Krauss
(eds), The Vanishing Languages of the Pacific Rim. Oxford, Oxford
University Press, pp. 3–24.

k10_syl.doc (Accessed 8 March 2009.)
Souter, H. 2004. The Michif Master-Apprentice Program (MAP) and
community language revitalization. Capmerville’s Community
Newsletter, November 2004.
Troy, J. and Walsh, M. 2005. A Linguistic Renaissance in the South East
of Australia (with Jakelin Troy). G. Senft (ed.), Proceedings of the
Sixth Conference of the European Society for Oceanists (ESfO),
Marseille, France, 6–8 July 2005. Canberra, Pacific Linguistics.
Tunstill, G. 2004. Adnyamathanha Years R-10: a Teaching Framework for
Revival and Second Language Learning in Years Reception to Ten.
Hindmarsh, SA, DECS Publishing.
Walsh, M. 2002. Language ownership: a key issue for native title.
J. Henderson and D. Nash (eds), Language and Native Title.
Canberra, Aboriginal Studies Press, pp. 230–44.
— . 2007. Indigenous languages: Transitions from the past to the
present. G. Leitner and I. Malcolm (eds), The Habitat of Australia’s
Aboriginal Languages: Past, Present and Future. Berlin, Mouton
de Gruyter, pp. 79–99.
Wilson, G. and Hercus, L. 2004. Arabana, Years R to 10: an Arabana
Teaching Framework for Language Revitalization and Second

131

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Language Learning from Reception to Year Ten. Hindmarsh, SA,

South America: Andean region

DECS Publishing.

Adelaar, W. F. H. and Muysken, P. 2004. The Languages of the Andes.

South America
Brenzinger, M. (ed.). 2007. Language Diversity Endangered. Berlin,
Mouton de Gruyter.
Censabella, M. 1999. Las lenguas indígenas de la Argentina: una mirada
actual. Buenos Aires, EUDEBA.
Crevels, M. 2007. South America. C. Moseley (ed.). Encyclopedia of the
World’s Endangered Languages. London/New York, Routledge.
DANE. 2007. El censo general 2005 (http://www.dane.gov.co/censo/)
Bogotá, Departamento Administrativo Nacional de Estadística.
Dixon, R. M. W. and Aikhenvald, A. Y. (eds). 1999. The Amazonian
Languages. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
INDEC. 2005. Encuesta complementaria de pueblos indígenas (ECPI),
2004–2005. Primeros resultados provisionales. Buenos Aires,
Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos.

Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Censabella, M. 1999. Las lenguas indígenas de la Argentina: una mirada
actual. Buenos Aires, EUDEBA.
CEPAR. Distribución especial y urbanización. Componentes del cambio
demográfico – Encuesta demográfica y de salud materna e infantil.
Quito, Centro de Población y Desarrollo Social.

http://www.

cepar.org.ec/endemain_04/nuevo05/inicio.htm (Accessed January
2009.)
Chirinos, A. 2001. Atlas lingüístico del Perú. Lima/Cuzco, Ministry of
Education/Centro Bartolomé de las Casas.
— . n.d. Las lenguas indígenas peruanas mas allá del 2000. Una
panorámica histórica. Cuzco, Centro Bartolomé de Las Casas.
http://revistandina.perucultural.org.pe/textos/chiri.doc (Accessed
July 2008.)

Kaufman, T. 1990. Language history in South America: What we know and

CODENPE. Nacionalidades y pueblos indígenas del Ecuador. Quito,

how to know more. Doris L. Payne (ed.), Amazonian Linguistics:

Consejo de Nacionalidades y Pueblos del Ecuador. http://www.

Studies in Lowland South American Languages. Austin, University

codenpe.gov.ec/htm.htm (Accessed November 2008.)

of Texas Press.
Lewis, M. P. (ed.). 2009. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 16th edn.
Dallas, Tex., SIL International.

Del Popolo, F. and Oyarce, A. M. 2005. Población indígena de América
Latina: perfil sociodemográfico en el marco de la Conferencia
Internacional sobre la Población y el Desarrollo y de las Metas

Moore, D., Vilacy Galucio, A. and Gabas, N. 2008. O desafio de

del Milenio. Pueblos indígenas y afrodescendientes de América

documentar e preservar as línguas amazônicas. Scientific American

Latina y el Caribe: información sociodemográfica para políticas y

(Brazil), No. 3.

programas. Santiago de Chile, Comisión Económica para América
Latina y el Caribe (CEPAL), pp. 35–62.

132

Haboud, M. 2005. Quichua ecuatoriano: entre el poder simbólico y
el poder real. H. Olbertz and P. Muysken (eds), Encuentros y

Bibliography

conflictos: bilingüismo y contacto de lenguas en el mundo andino.
Madrid/Frankfurt am Main, Iberoamericana/Vervuert, pp. 7–37.
INDEC. 2004–05. Encuesta complementaria de pueblos indígenas

Vinding, D. (ed.). 2003. The Indigenous World 2002–2003. Denmark,
International Work Group for Indigenous Affairs. http://www.iwgia.
org/sw29940.asp (Accessed March 2009.)

2004–2005. Buenos Aires, Instituto Nacional de Estadística y

Wessendorf, K. 2008. The Indigenous World 2008. Denmark, International

Censos. http://www.indec.gov.ar/webcenso/ECPI/ (Accessed

Work Group for Indigenous Affairs. http://www.iwgia.org/sw29940.

December 2008.)

asp (Accessed March 2009.)

INE. 2001. Censo nacional de población y vivienda. La Paz, Instituto
Nacional de Estadística. http://www.ine.gov.bo (Accessed

Mexico and Central America

December 2008.)

Aceto, M. J. 1996. Variation in a variety of Panamanian Creole English.

INEC. Quito. Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos. http://www.

inec.gov.ec (Accessed January 2009.)
King and Haboud, M. 2009. International migration and Quichua language
shift in the Ecuadorian Andes. T. McCarty (ed.), Ethnography and
Language Policy. New York, Routledge.
Lopez, C. 2002. Participación indígena en la implementación de políticas
lingüísticas en la educación: una experiencia con comunidades
Gauraníes Bolivianas. Paper presented during the World Congress
on Language Policies, Barcelona, 16–20 April 2002. Cochabamba,
PROEIB Andes – Universidad Mayor de San Simón.
Sichra, I. (in press). Atlas sociolingüístico de los pueblos indígenas de
América Latina. UNICEF – PROEIB. http://fundacion.proeibandes.
org/p_atlas.php (Accessed March 2009.)
SIISE (Sistema Integrado de Indicadores Sociales del Ecuador). http://
www.siise.gov.ec (Accessed December 2008.)
Stidsen, S. (ed.) 2006. The Indigenous World 2006. Denmark, International
Work Group for Indigenous Affairs. http://www.iwgia.org/sw29940.
asp (Accessed March 2009.)
Torero, A. 1964. Los dialectos quechuas. Anales Científicos de la
Universidad Agraria, Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 446–78.

Ph.D. thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
Belize, Central Statistical Office. 2000. National Population and
Housing Census, 2000. San José, University of Costa Rica (Centro
Centroamericano de Población).
Campbell, L. 1997. American Indian Languages: the Historical Linguistics
of Native America. New York, Oxford University Press.
Constenla Umaña, A. 1991. Las lenguas del área intermedia: introducción
a su estudio areal. San José, University of Costa Rica.
Costa Rica. 2000. Censo de población y vivienda. San José, University of
Costa Rica (Centro Centroamericano de Población).
Hekking, E. and Andrés de Jésus, S. 1984. Gramática otomí. Querétaro,
Universidad Autónoma de Querétaro.
Hekking, E. and Andrés de Jésus, S. 1989. Diccionario español-otomí
de Santiago Mexquititlán. Querétaro, Universidad Autónoma de
Querétaro.
Herzfeld, A. 2002. Mekaytelyuw: la lengua criolla. San José, University of
Costa Rica.
INEGI. 2005. XII censo general de población y vivienda 2000. Mexico
City, Instituto Nacional de Estadística, Geografía e Informática.
http://cuentame.inegi.gob.mx

133

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

INALI. 2005. Catálogo de lenguas indígenas mexicanas: cartografía
contemporánea de sus asentamientos históricos. Mexico City,
Instituto Nacional de Lenguas Indígenas and Universidad

of Native America. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Dorian, N. (ed). 1989. Investigating Obsolescence: Studies in Language
Contraction and Death. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Autónoma Metropolitana-Iztapalapa.
— . 2008. Catálogo de lenguas indígenas nacionales: variantes

England, N. C. 1998. Mayan efforts toward language preservation.

lingüísticas de México con sus autodenominaciones y referencias

L. Grenoble and L. Whaley (eds), Endangered Languages:

geoestadísticas. Mexico City, Instituto Nacional de Lenguas

Language Loss and Community Response. Cambridge, Cambridge

Indígenas. Diario oficial de la Federación, Vol. 652,

University Press, pp. 99–116.

No.

9: 1st section, pp. 31–78; 2nd section, pp. 1–96; 3rd section,
pp. 1–112.
Lastra de Suárez, Y. 1986. Las áreas dialectales del náhuatl moderno.
Mexico, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México.
— . 2006. Mexico and Central America. Sociolinguistics: an
International Handbook of the Science of Language and Society.
Berlin, Walter de Gruyter.

Goddard, I. 1996. The classification of the Native languages of
North America. Handbook of North American Indians, Vol. 17,
pp. 290–323. Washington, Smithsonian Institution.
Golla, V. 2007. North America. C. Moseley (ed.), Encyclopedia of the
World’s Endangered Languages. London/New York, Routledge,
pp. 1–96.
Golla, V., Goddard, I., Campbell, L., Mithun, M. and Mixco, M. 2007.

Montalván, A. 1997, 2006. Modelo metodológico para la alfabetización

North America. R. E. Asher and C. J. Moseley (eds), Atlas of

de adultos indígenas en la modalidad bilingüe intercultural.

the World’s Languages, 2nd ed. London/New York, Routledge,

Panama, Ministry of Education.

pp. 7–44.

Nicaragua. [various dates]. Censos nacionales de población y vivienda.

Grinevald, C. 1998. Language endangerment in South America: a

San José, University of Costa Rica (Centro Centroamericano de

programmatic approach. L. Grenoble and L. Whaley (eds),

Población).

Endangered Languages: Language Loss and Community

Panama. 2000. Censo 2000. San José, University of Costa Rica (Centro
Centroamericano de Población).

United States of America
Arviso, M. and Holm, W. 2001. Tséhootsooídi Olta’gi Diné Bizaad

134

Campbell, L. 1997. American Indian Languages: the Historical Linguistics

Response. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, pp. 124–59.
Hinton, L. 2001a. Federal language policy and indigenous languages
in the United States. L. Hinton and K. Hale (eds), The Green
Book of Language Revitalization in Practice. San Diego, Elsevier,
pp. 39–44.

B’hoo’aah: a Navajo immersion program at Fort Defiance,

— . 2001b. The master-apprentice language learning program.

Arizona. L. Hinton and K. Hale (eds), The Green Book of Language

L. Hinton and K. Hale (eds), The Green Book of Language

Revitalization in Practice. San Diego, Elsevier, pp. 203–16.

Revitalization in Practice. San Diego, Elsevier, pp. 217–26.

Bibliography

Hinton, L. and Hale, K. (eds). 2001. The Green Book of Language
Revitalization in Practice. San Diego, Elsevier.
Mithun, M. 1999. The Languages of Native North America. Cambridge/
New York, Cambridge University Press.

Norris, M. J. 1998. Canada’s Aboriginal languages. Canadian Social
Trends, Vol. 51 (Winter). Statistics Canada, Cat. No. 11-008.
— . 2003. From generation to generation: survival and maintenance
of Canada’s Aboriginal languages within families, communities

Platero, P. 2001. Navajo Head Start language study. L. Hinton and K. Hale

and cities. J. Blythe and R. M. Brown (eds), Maintaining the Links:

(eds), The Green Book of Language Revitalization in Practice. San

Language, Identity and the Land. Proceedings of the VII FEL

Diego, Elsevier, pp. 87–100.

Conference, Broome, Western Australia, 22–24 September 2003,

Supahan, T. and Supahan, S. E. 2001. Teaching well, learning quickly:
communication-based language instruction. L. Hinton and K. Hale
(eds), The Green Book of Language Revitalization in Practice. San
Diego, Elsevier, pp. 195–98.

Canada and Greenland
Castellano, M. B. and Archibald, L. 2007. Healing historic trauma: a report
from the Aboriginal Healing Foundation. J. P. White, P. Maxim
and D. Beavon (eds), Aboriginal Policy Research: Moving Forward,
Making a Difference, Vol. 4. Toronto, Thompson Educational
Publishing.
— . 2008. From Truth to Reconciliation: Transforming the Legacy of
Residential Schools. Ottawa, Aboriginal Healing Foundation.

pp. 22–4. Bath, UK, Foundation for Endangered Languages.
— . 2007. Aboriginal languages in Canada: Emerging trends and
perspectives on second language acquisition. Canadian Social
Trends, Vol. 83 (Summer), pp. 19–27. Ottawa, Statistics Canada.
http://www.statcan.ca/english/freepub/11-008-XIE/2007001/
pdf/11-008-XIE20070019628.pdf (Accessed 8 March 2009.)
— . 2008. Voices of Aboriginal youth today: keeping Aboriginal
languages alive for future generations. Horizons, Vol. 10, No. 1
(March), pp. 60–7. Ottawa, Policy Research Initiative. http://www.
policyresearch.gc.ca/doclib/HOR_v10n1_200803_e.pdf (Accessed
8 March 2009.)
Norris, M. J. and Jantzen, L. 2003. Aboriginal languages in Canada’s urban
areas: characteristics, considerations and implications. E. J. Peters
and D. Newhouse (eds), Not Strangers in These Parts: Urban

Gordon, R. G. (ed.) 2005. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 15th

Aboriginal Peoples. Ottawa, Policy Research Initiative, pp. 93–117.

edn. Dallas, Tex., SIL International. Online version: http://www.

http://recherchepolitique.gc.ca/doclib/AboriginalBook_e.pdf

ethnologue.com (Accessed 10 February 2009.)

(Accessed 8 March 2009.)

Kinkade, M. D. 1991. The decline of Native languages in Canada.

Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples. 1996. Report of the Royal

R. H. Robins and E. M. Uhlenbeck (eds), Endangered Languages.

Commission on Aboriginal Peoples. http://www.aincinac.gc.ca/ch/

Oxford/New York, Berg.

rcap/sg/sgmm_e.html (Accessed 8 March 2009.)

Lewis, M. P. (ed.). 2009. Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 16th edn.
Dallas, Tex., SIL International.

Statistics Canada. 2008. Aboriginal Peoples in Canada in 2006: Inuit, Métis
and First Nations, 2006. http://www12.statcan.ca/english/census06/

135

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

analysis/aboriginal/pdf/97-558-XIE2006001.pdf (Accessed 8 March
2009.)
Tulloch, S. 2005. Inuit youth: the future of Inuktitut. R. O. van Everdingen
(comp.), Proceedings of the 14th Inuit Studies Conference, the
Arctic Institute of North America, University of Calgary, Alberta,
Canada, 11–15 August 2004. Alberta, Canada, The Arctic Institute
of North America, University of Calgary, pp. 285–300. http://pubs.
aina.ucalgary.ca/aina/14thISCProceedings.pdf (Accessed 8 March
2009.)
UNESCO. 2003. Language vitality and endangerment. Document
submitted to the International Expert Meeting on UNESCO
Programme Safeguarding of Endangered Languages, Paris,
10–12 March 2003. http://www.unesco.org/culture/ich/doc/
src/00120-EN.pdf (Accessed 8 March 2009.)
Wurm, S. (ed.). 1996. Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger, 1st edn.
Paris, UNESCO Publishing.
— . 2001. Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger, 2nd edn. Paris,
UNESCO Publishing.

136

Index

Index

Bold numbers refer to maps

!Gan!ne 16
‘Ongota 15 23, 25
|’Auni 16
|Gui 16
|Xaise 16
|Xam 16
A’ingae / Cofan 6 97, 98
A’tong 20
Aasax 16
Abaga 25
Abai Sungai 23, 24
Abaza 11 41
Abkhaz 11 35, 41
Acatepec Mazatec 5
Achagua 6
Aché 9 92
Acheron 15
Achi’ 4
Achuar 6 97
Achumawi 3
Acoma-Laguna 3
Adabe 24
Adi 20
Adnyamathanha 26
Adyge 11 34, 35, 41
Afitti 15
Agul 11
Aheu 23
Ahom 20
Ahtna 1
Aikana 7 89
Aimol 20
Ainba 25
Ainu 1, 17, 22 48, 50, 51, 52
Aiton 20
Aivilingmiutut 1

Aja 15
Ajuru 7
Ak 25
Aka 20, 15
Akatek 4
Akawaio 6 91
Akeu 23 65, 66, 68
Akhvakh 11
Akie 16
Akkala Saami 1 35
Akum 14
Akuntsu 7
Akuriyo 6 91
Akwáwa 6, 8
Alabama 3 111
Alabat Island Agta 23
Alabugat Tatar 11
Alawa 26
Alderney French 10
Alemannic 10 37
Aleut 1, 17 48, 49, 109
Algherese Catalan 10 39
Alpine Provençal 10 39
Alune 25
Aluo 23
Alutor 1, 17 51
Amahai 25
Amahuaca 7
Amami 22
Amanayé 6, 8
Amba 15
Amblong 29
Amis 23
Amok 23
Ampibabo Lauje 24
Anal 20

137

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

138

Anambé 6, 8
Andi 11 42
Andio 24
Andoa 6 97, 98, 101
Andoke 6 87, 99
Andro 20
Anfillo 15
Angami 20
Angika 20
Angku 23
Animere 14
Anindilyakwa 26
Antakirinya 26
Antoniano 3
Añu 6
Anuki 25
Anung 22 66, 7
Anus 25
Ao 20
Aore 29
Apalai 6
Apatani 20
Apiaká 7, 8 89
Apinajé 8
Apolista 7
Apurinã 6, 7
Aputai 24
Aqaw Gelao 22
Arabana 26 83, 85, 131
Arabela 6
Aragonese 10 38
Araki 29
Araona 7
Arapaho 3 111
Arapáso 6
Arara do Pará 6, 8

Arára Shawãdáwa 7
Araweté 6, 8
Arawun 25
Arbanasi 10
Arbëresh 10
Arbore 15
Archi 11
Arem 23 65, 68
Argobba 15
Arguni 25
Arha 29
Arho 29
Ari 25
Aribwatsa 25
Arikapu 7
Arikara 2 111
Arman 1, 17 52
Aromanian 10 40
Arrernte 26 82, 85
Arta 23 67
Aruá 7
Aruaco 4, 6
Arvanitika 10, 13
As 25
Ashaninka 7 98
Ashkun 19 46
Ashtiani 12 45
Assiniboine 2 111, 119
Asturian-Leonese 10 38
Asumboa 28
Asur 21
Asurini do Xingu 6, 8
Ata 23 67
Atacameño 9 93
Atemble 25
Athpahariya 20

Atikamekw 2
Atsugewi 3
Aurê-Aurá 8
Austral dialects 27
Auvergnat 10 39
Auye 25
Ava-Canoeiro 8
Ava-Guaraní 9 93
Avar 11 42
Aveteian 29
Awa Cuaiquer 6
Awajun 6, 7
Awakatek 4
Awapit 6
Awera 25
Aweti 8
Awjila 13
Awyi 25
Ayapanec 4
Ayautla Mazatec 5
Ayizi 23
Aymara 7 86, 93, 98, 99, 100,
101
Ayoreo 7
Babuza 23
Badaga 21
Badala 26
Bade 13, 14
Badiaranke 14
Baga Kalem 14
Baga Manduri 14
Baga Mboteni 14
Baga Sitemu 14
Baghati 19
Bagupi 25
Bagvalal 11

Baheng 22, 23 69, 72
Bahing 20
Bahonsuai 24
Bai 15
Baima 22 70
Bainouk-Gunyaamolo 14
Bainouk-Samik 14
Bakairi 8
Baki 29
Bakole 14
Bakpinka 14
Baldemu 14
Baleasang 24
Balti 19
Bambassi 15
Bana 23 65
Banat Bulgarian 10
Banawá Yafi 7
Bandial 14
Bangani 19
Bangni 20
Bangsa 29
Baniva 6
Baníwa do Içana 6
Banjima 26
Banka 14
Bantawa 20
Bara 6
Baraba Tatar 1, 17, 18
Baraˉm 20
Baras 24
Barasana 6
Barbareño 3
Bardi 26
Baré 6
Barí 4, 6

Index

Bartangi 18, 19 44
Barzani Jewish Neo-Aramaic 12
Basay 23
Bashkardi 12 46
Bashkarik 19
Bashkir 17, 18 42
Basque 10 16, 32, 35
Bassari 14
Bataan Ayta 23
Batak 23 67
Batek 24
Bateri 19 47
Bathari 12
Bati 14
Bats 11 41
Baure 7
Bavarian 10
Bawm 21, 23
Bay Islands Creole 4
Baygo 15
Bayot 14
Bayso 15 23, 24
Beaver 2 119
Bedoanas 25
Beeke 15
Beezen 14
Belanda Bor 15
Belarusian 10 37
Beli 15
Bella Coola 2 119
Bellari 21
Benga 14
Benggoi 25
Bepour 25
Berakou 13, 14
Berbice Dutch Creole 6 91

Berti 13, 15
Besme 14
Besoa 24
Bezhta 11
Bhadravahi 19
Bhalesi 19
Bharmauri 19
Bhumji 21
Biak 25
Bierebo 29
Bieria 29
Biete 20
Bikaru 25
Bikya 14
Bilakura 25
Bina 25
Birgid 13, 15
Birhor 21
Birri 15
Bishnupriya Manipuri Creole 20
Bishuo 14
Bisu 23 65, 66, 68, 69, 130
Blablanga 28
Black Mountain 20
Blackfoot 2 111, 115, 119
Boano 24
Bodo 20 59, 61, 62
Boguru 15
Bohtan Neo-Aramaic 11
Bokar 20
Bola 23 71
Bolo 16
Bom 14
Bonan 22 56
Bonerif 25
Bong’om 15

Bonggo 25
Bongo 15
Boni 15
Bonjo 14, 15
Boor 14
Bora 6
Bori 20
Boro 15, 14
Bororo 8
Boruca 4
Bosilewa 25
Bothar 25
Botlikh 11
Brahui 19
Brao 23
Breton 10 38
Bribri 4
Brokkat 20
Brokpa 20
Brokshat 19
Bru 23
Bubia 14
Budibud 25, 28
Budong-Budong 24
Budukh 11
Buga 15
Buglé 4
Bukharic 18 45
Bukiyip 25
Bulgebi 25
Bumbita Arapesh 25
Bumthang 20
Bunan 19
Bundjalung 26
Bung 14
Bungee 2 119

Bunuba 26
Bunun 23
Burate 25
Burgenland Croatian 10
Burgundian 10 39
Burji 15
Burunge 16
Burushaski 19 43
Buryat 17, 22 49, 50, 51, 53,
56
Busoa 24
Bussa 15
Busuu 14
Buyang 23 71
Bwisi 14
Byangsi 19, 2
Caac 29
Cabécar 4
Cabiyarí 6
Cacaopera 4
Cacua 6
Caddo 3
Cahuilla 3
Callahuaya 7
Camarines Norte Agta 23
Cambap 14
Campidanese 10, 13 34, 39
Camsá 6 87
Candoshi 6
Canichana 7
Capanahua 7
Cape Khoekhoe 16
Cappadocian Greek 10, 12
Caquinte Campa 7
Carabayo 6
Carapana 6

139

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

140

Carijona 6
Carrier 1, 2 115, 119
Cashibo-Cacataibo 7
Cashinahua 7
Catawba 2 109, 111
Cavineña 7
Cayuga 2, 3 119
Cayuse 3 109
Cayuvava 7
Central Alaskan Yupik 1
Central Asian Arabic 18, 19
Central Cagayan Agta 23
Central Cuicatec 5
Central Kalapuyan 3
Central Náhuatl 4
Central Ojibwe 2 119
Central Otomí 4
Central Pame 4
Central Pomo 3
Central Popoloc 5
Central Selkup 17
Central Siberian Yupik 1, 17
Central Sierra Miwok 3
Central Tlapanec 5
Central Zoque 4
Ch’orti’ 4
Cha’palaa 6 96, 97
Chácobo 7
Chali 20
Chamacoco 9
Chamalal 11
Chambeali 19
Chamicuro 6, 07
Chamling 20
Chamorro 27 78
Champenois 10 39

Chaná 9 87, 92
Chang 20
Chantyal 19, 2
Chara 15
Chatino of the western
lowlands 5
Chatino of Zacatepec 5
Chatong 23
Chawte 20 66
Chayahuita 6, 07
Che Wong 24
Chechen 11 34, 41
Chemehuevi 3 111
Chepang 20
Chepya 23
Cherokee 3, 2 111
Chesu 23
Cheyenne 3 111
Chichimec 4 105
Chickasaw 3
Chihuahua Lower Pima 2
Chilchotla Mazatec 5
Chilcotin 2 115, 119
Chilisso 19 47
Chimané 7
Chimila 4, 6
Chinook Jargon 3
Chintang 20
Chintaw 23 71
Chipaya 7
Chiquihuitlán Mazatec 5
Chiquitano 7, 8 99, 1
Chiwere 3
Chi-li-ng 20
Cho-ca-nga-ca-kha 20
Choctaw 2, 3 111

Chokri 20
Cholon 7
Chong 23
Chontal Tabasco 4
Chorote Iyojwa’ja 9
Chorotega 4
Choyi 22
Chrau 23
Chru 23 69
Chuang 23
Chuj 4
Chukchi 1, 17 48, 49, 51, 52
Chulym Turk 1, 17
Chung 23, 21
Churahi 19
Chuvash 10, 18 42
Cimbrian 10
Cinta Larga 7
Cobiana 14
Cocama-Cocamilla 6, 7
Cocopa 3 111
Coeur d’Alene 3 111
Columbian 2
Comanche 3 111
Comox/Sliammon 2 119
Côông 23 65, 69
Copper Island Aleut 1, 17
Coptic 12, 13
Corfiot Italkian 10, 13 35
Cornish* 10
Corsican 10 39, 4
Cosung 23 69
Cowlitz 3
Creek 3 111
Crimean Tatar 10
Crimean Turkish 10

Crow 3 111
Csángó Hungarian 10
Cubeo 6
Cuiba 6
Culina 7
Culle 7
Cuona Menba 20 70
Cupeño 3
Cypriot Arabic 12 41
Dabra 25
Dagur 17, 22 53, 54, 55, 58
Dahaalik 12
Dahalo 15
Dair 15
Dakka 24
Dakkang 23
Dakota 2 115, 119
Dakpa 20
Dalecarlian 10 38
Dalmatian 10 38
Damal 25
Damana 4, 6
Dameli 19 47
Dampal 24
Dampelas 24
Danaw 21, 23 66
Danisi 16
Danuwar 20 60
Darai 20 60
Dargwa 11 42
Dari 12
Darma 19, 2 60
Dâw 6
Defaka 14
Demisa 25
Dene 2 109, 114, 115, 119

Index

Dengalu 25
Dení 7
Deori 20
Desano 6
Deti 16
Dhaiso 16
Dharawal 26
Dharug 26
Dhimal 20
Dhurga 26
Diahói 7
Dicamay Agta 23
Dilling 15
Dimasa 20
Dimbong 14
Dimme 15
Djeoromitxi 7
Djinang 26
Doga 25
Dogrib 1 115
Dol-po 19, 2
Dolgan 1, 17 49, 50, 51
Domaaki 19 47
Domari 12 29
Dondo 24
Dongotono 15
Dorig 28
Dororo 28
Dorro 25
Doutai 25
Drubea 29
Dubu 25
Duguza 14
Dukha 17, 22
Dulbu 14
Duli 14

Dumi 20 60
Dumun 25
Dungan 18 45
Dungidjau 26
Dungmali 20
Dupaninan Agta 23
Dura 20 60
Duriankere 25
Dusner 25
Duwet 25
Dyirbal 26
Dzala 20
Dzhidi 12 46
Dzongkha 20 61
East Cape Yupik 1, 17
East Franconian 10
East Greenlandic 1
Eastern Abenaki 2
Eastern Cham 23 65, 69
Eastern Chocho 5
Eastern Cuicatec 5
Eastern Khanty 17
Eastern Mansi 17
Eastern Mari 10, 18 36
Eastern Mazahua 4
Eastern Montagnais 2 115,
119
Eastern Ojibwe 2 119
Eastern Pomo 3
Eastern Popoloc 5
Eastern Slovak 10
Eastern Tlapanec 5
Ebang 15
Ediamat 14
Eel River Athabaskan 3
Ega 14

El Hugeirat 15
Eliri 15
Elmolo 15 24
Eloxochitlán Mazatec 5
Emae 29
Eman 14
Embera 4, 06 88
Émérillon 6 91
Emilian-Romagnol 10 39
Emplawas 25
En 23
Enawenê-Nawê 7
Enggano 24
Eotile 14
Erokwanas 25
Ersu 22 70
Erzya 10
Ese eja 7
Even 1, 17 25, 27, 29, 39, 49,
50, 51, 52, 55, 56, 63, 65, 75,
82, 83, 105, 109, 120
Evenki 17, 22, 1 49, 51, 52,
54, 55, 58
Eyak 1 109
Faetar 10
Fagauvea 29
Faghani 28
Faire Atta 23
Faita 25
Fania 14, 15
Faroese 10 32, 38
Fayu 25
Feroge 15
Figuig 13
Filomeno Mata Totonac 4
Fongoro 15

Forest Enets 1, 17 51
Forest Nenets 17 49
Forest Yukagir 1, 17
Foya 25
Franc-Comtois 10 39
Francoprovençal 10 39
Friulian 10 39, 4
Fwâi 29
Fyem 14
Gaagudju 26
Gadaba 21
Gadang 14
Gafat 15
Gagauz 10
Gajerrong 26
Galibi Marworno 6
Gallo 10 38, 39, 40
Gallo-Sicilian 10, 13
Gallurese 10 39
Galo 20
Gambiri 19 46
Gamilaraay 26
Ganan 20
Ganggalidda 26
Gangou 22
Gangte 20
Gao 28
Gardiol 10, 13 39
Garhwali 19
Garífuna 4 94, 106
Garrwa 26
Garuwahi 25
Gascon 10 33, 34, 39
Gats’ama - Ganjule - Harro 15
Gavião de Rondônia 7
Gavião do Pará 6, 8

141

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

142

Gawar-Bati 19 47
Gazhuo 23
Gazi 12 45
Ge’ez 15
Gebe 25
Geji cluster 14
Geme 15
Gera 14
Geta? 21
Getmata 25
Gey 14
Ghadames 13 29
Ghale 20
Ghomara 10, 13
Gitksan 1, 2
Godoberi 11
Gondi 21
Gong 23 68, 69
Gongduk 20
Gooniyandi 26
Gorap 25
Gorovu 25
Gorum 21
Gottscheerish 10 35
Goundo 14
Gowro 19 47
Grass Koiari 25
Great andamanese 21
Green Gelao 22, 23 68
Griko 10, 13
Gros Ventre 2
Guajá 8
Guajajara 8
Guajiro 6 90
Guambiano 6
Guaná 9

Guaraní Boliviano 7, 9 93
Guarasu 7 89
Guarayu 7
Guató 7, 8
Guatuso 4
Guayabero 6
Guernsey French 10
Guichong 22 70
Gule 15
Gumbaynggirr 26 84
Gününa Küne 9 92
Gupapuyngu 26
Gura 14
Guranalum 25
Gurdu-Mbaaru 14
Gurrgoni 26
Gurung 20
Gusilay 14
Gutnish 10 38
Gutob 21
Guugu Yimidhirr 26
Gweno 15, 16
Gwich’in 1 111, 119, 121
Gyasumdo 19, 2
Gyele 14
Gyem 14
Ha-lung Tibetan 20
Habu 24
Hachijoˉ 22
Hadza 15 25
Haisla 1, 2 119
Halkomelem 2 119
Han 1 115, 119, 130
Handuri 19
Hanis 3 111
Harakmbut 7

Harsusi 12
Havasupai 3
Hawaiian 27 78
Hawrami 12 46
Hayu 20 60
Heiban 15
Heiltsuk 2
Helong 24, 26
Hermit 25
Hértevin 12 41
Hidatsa 2
Higher Reservoir Mazatec 5
Highland Chontal 5
Highland Mazatec 5
Hijuk 14
Hill Miri 20
Hinukh 11
Hiw 28
Hixkaryána 6
Hlersu 23
Hmar 20
Ho 21 59, 111
Hoanya 23
Hoava 28
Hobyot 12
Hodi 6 90
Holikachuk 1
Homa 15
Homshetsma 11 40
Hopi 3 17, 111
Horo 14, 15
Hoti 25
Hozo 15
Hpun 23
Hrangkhol 20
Hu 23

Hualapai 3 111
Huasteca Náhuatl 4
Huehuetla Tepehua 4
Huehuetlán Mazatec 5
Huichol 4
Huilliche 9 93
Huitoto 6
Hukumina 24
Hulaula 12
Hulung 25
Hung 23
Hunzib 11
Hupa 3 111
Hupda 6
Huron-Wyandot 2, 3
Huzhu Monguor 22
Hya 14
Ibu 24
Idu 20
Iduh 23 65, 68, 69
Ifo 29
Ik 15
Ikpeng 8
Ili Turk 18
Ilue 14
Imeraguen 13 29
Iñapari 7
Inari Saami 1, 17 35, 36
Indri 15
Ineseño 3
Inga 6 96, 101
Ingalik 1
Ingrian 10 36
Ingush 11 34, 41
Inkhokvari 11
Inuinnaqtun 1 114, 118, 121

Index

Ipai 3
Iquito 6
Iranxe 7, 8 89
Iresim 25
Irish 10 38
Irula 21
Isarog Agta 23
Ishkashimi 18, 19 44
Isirawa 25
Island Carib 6
Island Chumash 3
Isthmus Náhuatl 5
Istriot 10 38, 4
Istro-Romanian 10 40
Isu 14
Itelmen 1, 17 49, 51
Iteri 25
Itik 25
Itonama 7
Itzá 4
Iwaidja 25
Ixcatec 5
Ixcatlán Mazatec 5
Ixil 4
Ixtenco Otomí 4
Iyive 14
Jad 19
Jah Hut 24
Jahai 23, 24
Jakaltek 4
Jamamadí 7
Jaminjung 26
Jangshung 19
Jaqaru 7
Jarawa 21
Jarawára 7

Jaunsari 19
Javaé 8
Javindo Creole 24
Jawe 29
Jawoyn 26
Jaya 14, 15
Jebero 6, 7
Jemez 3
Jeri 14
Jero 20
Jersey French 10
Jibbali 12
Jicarilla Apache 3
Jilbe 14
Jingulu 26
Jinuo 23
Jiongnai Bunu 23
Jirel 20
Jitnu 6
Jola-Kassa 13, 14
Jone 22
Jonkor Bourmataguil 15
Jorá 7
Juang 21
Judeo-Berber 12, 13 31
Judezmo 10, 12 35, 38
Juhur 11, 12 35, 4
Juk 23
Juma 7
K’emant 15
K’iche’ 4
Ka’apór 8
Kaande 14
Kabard-Cherkes 11 34, 41
Kabui 20
Kachari 20

Kaco’ 23
Kadai 24
Kadaru 15
Kadiwéu 9
Kadu 20
Kaˉgate 20
Kahumamahon Saluan 24
Kaibobo 25
Kaiep 25
Kaike 19, 2
Kaingang 9 92
Kaiowá Guarani 9
Kairui-Midiki 24
Kaixána 6 89
Kaiy 25
Kaki Ae 25
Kalamo 25
Kalao 24
Kalapalo 8
Kalasha 19 47
Kalaw Lagaw Ya 25
Kalispel 2 111
Kalmyk 11 42, 56
Kamaiurá 8
Kamara 14
Kamarian 25
Kamas 17 52
Kamas Turk 17
Kamasa 25
Kami 16
Kanakanabu 23
Kanashi 19
Kandas 25
Kanela Apaniekra 8
Kanela Rankokamekra 8
Kanga 15

Kangdi 19
Kangjia 22 56, 57
Kaniet 25
Kaningara 25
Kanoê 7 89
Kanowit 24
Kansa 3 111
Kao 24
Kapingamarangi 27
Kapori 25
Kaqchikel 4
Karachay-Balkar 11 42
Karagash 10, 18
Karaim 10 42
Karajá 8
Karajarri 26
Karami 25
Karang 14
Karas 25
Karata 11 42
Karbi 20
Karelian 10 36
Kari 15
Kari’ña 6
Karipuna 7
Karipuna do Amapá 6
Karitiana 7
Karko 15
Karo 7, 15
Karone 14
Karore 25
Karuk 3 109, 110, 111
Kasanga 14
Kashaya 3
Kashubian 10 33, 37
Kaska 1 119

143

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

144

Kasong 23
Katabaga 23
Katawixi 7
Kathu 23
Kati 19 46
Katla 15
Kato 3
Katukina do Acre 7
Katukína-Kanamarí 6, 7
Katxuyana-Xikuyána 6
Kaurna 26 83, 13
Kavalan 23
Kawaiisu 3
Kawucha 25
Kaxarari 7
Kayabi 8
Kayardild 26
Kayeli 24
Kayupulau 25
Kazukuru 28
Kede 16
Keder 25
Keiga 15
Kelo 15
Kembra 25
Kenaboi 24 66
Kendeje 13, 15
Kendem 14
Kensiw 23, 24
Kentak 23, 24
Kerek 1, 17 52
Ket 17 48, 49, 51, 52
Ketangalan 23
Khaccad. Bhot.e 20
Khakas 17, 22 49, 50, 51, 52,
54

Khalaj 12 45
Khaling 20
Kham 19, 2
Khamba 20
Khamnigan Mongol 17,
22 51, 54
Khampti 22 62
Khang Quang Lam 23 68
Kharia 21
Khasali 19
Khasi 20 59, 62
Kheng 20
Kheza 20
Khiamngan 20
Khinalug 11
Khmin 23
Khoirao 20
Khojki 12
Khorasani Turk 12, 18
Khövsgöl Uryangkhay 17, 22
Khowa 20
Khowar 19 47
Khunsari 12 45
Khvarshi 11
Khwe 16
Kickapoo 3, 02
Kija 26
Kiksht 3
Kildin Saami 1, 17 35
Kilen 17, 22 54
Kili 1, 17, 22 54
Kilit 12 41
Kiliwa 3 105
Kim 14
Kinare 15
Kings River Yokuts 3

Kinikinau 9
Kinnauri 19
Kiong 14
Kiowa 3 109
Kiowa Apache 3
Kisêdjê 8
Kivallirmiutut 1
Klallam 2 111
Klamath-Modoc 3 109
Ko 15
Koasati 3
Koch 20
Koda 21
Kodagu 21
Kodeoha 24
Kofei 25
Kogui 4, 6
Kohi 20
Koireng 20
Koitabu 25
Kokborok 20, 21 62
Koke 14, 15
Koko Bera 26
Kokota 28
Kolami 12, 21
Kom 20
Komi 10, 17 34, 36
Komo 15
Kona 14
Konda 21
Koneraw 25
Konkow 3
Konni 14
Konomihu 3
Konyak 20
Koraga 21

Korana 16
Korandje 13 29
Kore 15
Koreguaje 6
Korku 21
Koro 28
Koroni 24
Koroshi 12 46
Korúbo 6, 7
Korwa 21
Koryak 1, 17 49, 51
Kosraean 27
Kota 21
Kowaki 25
Kowiai 25
Koyukon 1
Krahô 8
Kraol 23
Kravet 23
Krenak 8
Krenjê 8
Kri 23
Krikati 8
Kristang 24
Krongo 15
Krueng 23
Kryz 11
Kua 16
Kuay 23
Kudu-Camo 14
Kui 21
Kuikuro 8
Kujarge 15
Kujubim 7
Kuk 14
Kukatja 26

Index

Kuku Yalanji 26
Kulfa 15
Kulina Páno 6, 7
Kului 19
Kulun 23
Kulung 20
Kumak 29
Kumaˉle 20
Kumaoni 19, 2
Kumyk 11 42
Kumzari 12
Kuna 4, 6
Kunbarlang 26
Kundal Shahi 19
Kung 14
Kunigami 22
Kunjen 26
Kunwinjku 26
Kuot 25
Kurrama 26
Kurripako 6
Kurru 21
Kurtjar 26
Kurtöp 20
Kuruáya 6, 8
Kuruba 21
Kurux 20, 21
Kusunda 20
Kutenai 2 109, 111, 115, 119
Kuuku Ya’u 26
Kuurinji 26
Kuvi 21
Kw’adza 16
Kwadi 16 25
Kwak’wala 2 119
Kwama 15

Kwansu 25
Kwatay 14
Kwazá 7 89
Kwegu 15 23
Kwerisa 25
Kwisi 16
Laal 14, 15 25
Labo 29
Lacandón 4
Lachi 23 71
Ladakhi 19
Ladin 10 39, 4
Lae 25
Laemae 23 70
Lafofa 15
Laghu 28
Laghuu 23 69, 71
Laha 23
Lai 23
Laiyolo 24
Laji 23 71
Lajia 23 71
Lak 11 42
Lake Miwok 3
Lakha 20
Lakon 28
Lakota 2 111, 115
Lalo 23
Lamgang 20
Lamongse 21, 23
Lamu 23
Langa 14
Langrong 20
Langthang Tibetan 20
Languedocian 10 39
Lanoh 23, 24

Laomian 23 66
Lardil 26
Lari 12 46
Laro 15
Latgalian 10 34, 37
Laua 25
Lauje 24
Lavua 21, 23
Laxudumau 25
Laz 11 41
Leco 7
Legenyem 25
Lehali 28
Lemerig 28
Lemolang 24
Lenca 4 106
Lengilu 24
Lengua 9
Lepcha 20
Lezgian 11 42
Lhokpu 20 61
Lhota 20
Li-Ngbee 15
Liangmai 20
Ligurian 10 39
Liki 25
Likum 25
Liliali 24
Lillooet 2 119
Limbu 20
Limburgian-Ripuarian 10
Limirong Tibetan 19, 2
Limonese Creole 4
Limousin 10 39
Lipan 3
Lisela 24

Lishan Didan 12 41, 46
Lishana Deni 12
Lishanid Noshan 12
Lishpa 20
Livonian* 10
Logol 15
Logorik 15
Logudorese 10, 13 34, 39
Lohorung 20
Loke Tibetan 19, 2
Lokono 6 91
Lola 25
Lolak 24
Lom 24
Lombard 10 39
Lorediakarkar 29
Lorkoti 15
Lorrain 10 39
Loun 25
Low Saxon 10 33, 37
Lower Chehalis 3
Lower Mixe 5
Lower Northwestern Otomí 4
Lowland Chontal 5
Lowland Mazatec 5
Löyöp 28
Lua 23
Lude 10 36
Luiseño 3 111
Lule Saami 1 35
Lumun 15
Luri 14
Luro 21
Lushootseed 2 111
Mabiri 14, 15
Macaguaje 6

145

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

146

Machiguenga 7
Machineri 7
Macuna 6
Macushi 6
Madngele 26
Mafea 29
Magar 20
Magori 25
Mah Meri 24
Mahasui 19
Mahigi 25
Mahongwe 14
Maidu 3
Maiya 19
Majera 14
Majhi 20 60
Mak 23 71
Maká 9
Makah 2
Mako 6
Makolkol 25
Máku 6 89
Maku’a 24
Makurap 7
Malak Malak 26
Malecite 2 119
Maleng 23
Malin 20
Malinaltepec Tlapanec 5
MaliseetPassamaquoddy 2 111
Malmariv 29
Malto 20, 21
Mam 4
Mambai 14
Mancagne 14

Manchad 19
Manchu 22, 17 52, 53, 54, 55,
57, 58
Manchurian Kirghiz 22 54,
55, 58
Manchurian Ölöt 22 53, 54, 55
Manda 21
Mandaic 12 31, 46
Mandan 2 111
Mandeali 19
Mander 25
Mang 23 69, 72
Mangareva 27
Mangarla 26
Mangarrayi 26
Mani 14
Manihiki 27
Maniq 23, 24
Maniwaki Algonquin 2 119
Manjui 9
Mansim 25
Manx* 10
Mao 20
Maonan 23 71
Maori 27 75, 76, 78
Mapia 25
Mapuche 9 17, 86, 92, 93
Mara 20, 21
Maragus 29
Maram 20
Maremgi 25
Mari 25 35, 36
Maricopa 3 111
Maring 20
Maringarr 26
Mariupolitan Greek 10

Marrgu 25
Marrisyefin 26
Marrithiyel 26
Martuwangka 26
Marúbo 7
Maslam 14
Massalat 13, 15
Massep 25
Matagalpa 4
Matanvat 29
Matipu 8
Matís 7
Matlatzinca 4 105
Mattole 3
Maung 26
Mawak 25
Mawayana 6 91
Mawé 6, 8
Maxakali 8
May 23
Mayo 2
Mayoruna 6, 7
Mazatlán Mazatec 5
Mbara 14
Mbya Guarani 9
Mebengokre 8
Mech 20
Megleno-Romanian 10 40
Mehináku 8
Mehri 12
Meithei 20 61, 62
Menik 13, 14
Menominee 2 111
Menri’ 24
Meriam Mir 25
Mescalero-Chiricahua Apache 3

Mewahang 20
Mezquital Otomí 4
Miami-Illinois 3 111
Michif 1, 2 111, 115, 119, 120,
131
Micmac 2 115
Migueleño 3
Miji 20
Miju 20, 22
Mikasuki 2
Milang 20
Miltu 14
Mindiri 25
Mingrelian 11 41
Minhe Monguor 22
Minyong 20
Miqie 22
Miraña 6
Mirití Tapuia 6
Miriwoong 26
Misantla Totonac 4
Mising 20
Miskito 4
Mixtec of San Miguel Piedras 5
Mixtec of San Pedro Tidaá 5
Mixtec of Santa Cruz
Itundujia 5
Mixtec of Santa Inés de
Zaragoza 5
Mixtec of the central Ravine 5
Mixtec of the northeast
lowlands 5
Mixtec of the Puebla-Oaxaca
border 5
Mixtec of the southwest of
Puebla 5

Index

Mixtec of Tlaltempan 5
Mixtec of Villa de Tututepec 5
Mixtec of Zapotitlán 5
Miyako 23
Mizo 20, 21 62
Mlabri 23 65, 68
Mlahso 12 41
Mlomp 14
Mo-peng 14
Mo’ang 23 69, 71
Mo’da 15
Mòcheno 10
Mochica 7
Mocoví 9
Moere 25
Moghol 12
Mohave 3 111
Mohawk 2 111, 115, 119
Mojo 7
Mok 23 65, 66, 68, 72
Mokilese 27
Moklen 21, 23 66, 68
Moksela 24
Moksha 10
Molala 3
Molise Croatian 10
Molo 15
Momuna 25
Mon 21, 23 64, 66, 68, 69, 72,
123, 124, 130
Mono 14
Mono 3
Montana Salish 2
Moose Cree 2
Mopán 4
Mor 25

Moraori 25
Moré 7
Mores 29
Moro 15
Moroccan Judeo-Arabic 12, 13
Morokodo 15
Mortlockese 27
Moselle Franconian 10 32, 37
Mosetén 7
Mosimo 25
Mosquitia Creole 4
Motocintlec 4
Motuo Menba 20 70
Mountain Guarijío 2
Movima 7
Moyon 20
Mpi 23 68
Mra 20
Mru 21, 23 63, 66
Mt. Iraya Agta 23
Muda 23
Mudburra 26
Muinane 6
Muji 23 71, 13
Mulaha 25
Mulam 23 71
Mulao 22 71
Mundari 21
Mundurukú 7, 8
Munichi 6, 7 99
Munji 19
Munsee 2
Muot 21
Múra 6
Murik 25
Mursi 15 23

Musan 25
Musom 25
Mussau-Emira 25
Muya 22 70
Mvanip 14
Mwatebu 25
Mwesen 28
Myky 7
Mzieme 20
N|uu 16
Na 20
Naati 29
Nachiring 20
Nadëb 6
Nafi 25
Nafusi 13
Nagumi 14
Nahali 12, 21
Nahukwa 8
Naiki 12, 21
Naka’ela 25
Nakkara 26
Nalu 14
Naluo 22
Naman 29
Nambiquara do Norte 7
Nambiquara do Sul 7
Namonuito 27
Namuyi 22 70
Nanay 01, 17, 22 49, 51, 54
Ñandeva Guarani 9
Nanti 7
Napore 15
Napu 24
Narau 25
Narim 15

Narpa 19, 2
Nasarian 29
Naskapi 1, 2 115, 119
Natanzi 12 45
Nataoran 23
Natchez 2 109
Natsilingmiutut 1 114
Naueti 24
Nauna 25
Nauruan 27
Navajo 3 17, 109, 110, 111,
134, 135
Navwien 29
Nayi 15
Nayini 12 45
Ndai 14
Nding 15
Ndunda 14
Negidal 1, 17, 22 51
Neku 29
Nemadi 13 29
Nemi 29
New River Shasta 3
Newar 20 60
Nez Perce 3 111
Ngaanyatjarra 26
Ngaatjatjara 26
Ngäbere 4
Ngalakan 26
Ngaliwuru 26
Ngalkbun 26
Nganasan 1, 17 51
Ngandi 26
Ngangikurunggurr 26
Ngardi 26
Ngarinman 26

147

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

148

Ngarinyin 26
Ngarla 26
Ngarluma 26
Ngatikese Men’s Creole 27
Ngbinda 15
Ngile 15
Ngombe 14
Ngong 14
Nguon 23
Ngwaba 14
Nheengatu / Yeral 6
Nihali 12, 21
Nila 25
Ninam 6
Ningalami 19 47
Nisenan 3
Nisga’a 1, 02 119
Nisvai 29
Niuean 27
Nivaclé 9
Nivat 29
Niviar 29
Nivkh 1, 17, 22 48, 49, 50,
51, 52
Njalgulgule 15
Njerep 14
Nocte 20
Nogay 10, 11 42
Nomatsiguenga 7
Nonuya 6
Nooksack 2
Noon 13, 14
Nootka 2 114, 119
Norfolk-Pitcairn 27
Norman 10 39
North Alaskan Inupiaq 1, 17

North Frisian 10 37
North Greenlandic 1
North Saami 1, 17 35, 36
North Slavey 1
Northeastern Pomo 3
Northern Algonquin 2
Northern Alta 23
Northern Altay 17, 18, 22
Northern Cuicatec 5
Northern East Cree 2
Northern Haida 1
Northern Khanty 17 51
Northern Mansi 17 49
Northern Paiute 3 111
Northern Pame 4
Northern Pomo 3
Northern Popoloc 5
Northern Selkup 1, 17 49
Northern Sierra Miwok 3
Northern Straits Salish 2
Northern Tepehuán 2
Northern Tlapanec 5
Northern Totonac 4
Northern Tujia 22 70
Northern Tutchone 1 119
Northwestern Ojibwe 2
Northwestern Otomí 4
Northwestern Tarahumara 2
Northwestern Tlapanec 5
Noy 14, 15
Nruanghmei 20
Nubaca 14
Nukak 6
Nukiní 7
Nukuoro 27
Numao Bunu 23

Numbani 25
Nunatsiavummiutut 1, 2 114,
118
Nunavimmiutitut 1, 2
Nung Ven 23
Nunggubuyu 26
Nupbikha 20
Nupri 19, 2
Nusa Laut 25
Nyah Kur 23
Nyamal 26
Nyang’i 15
Nyangumarta 26
Nyenkha 20
Nyikina 26
Nyishangba 19, 2
Nyishi 20
Nyoe 23
O’odham 3
Obispeño 3
Obokuitai 25
Ocaina 6
Ocopetatillo Mazatec 5
Ocoyoacac Otomí 4
Odut 14
Ofayé 9
Oirata 24
Oji-Cree 2 115, 119
Ojibwe 3 111, 114, 119
Okanagan 2 119
Okinawan 23
Old Sirenik 1, 17
Olonetsian 10 36
Olrat 28
Olultecan 5
Omagua 6, 7

Omaha-Ponca 3
Omotik 15
Ona 9 92
Oneida 2
Ongamo 15
Onge 21
Ongkor Solon 18 58
Onin 25
Onjab 25
Onondaga 2
Opon-Carare 4, 6
Opuuo 15
Orang Hulu 24 66
Orang Kanaq 24 66
Orang Seletar 24 66, 67
Ordos 22 56
Orejón 6
Ormu 25
Ormuri 19 45
Oro Win 7
Oroch 1, 22 51
Oroha 28
Orok 01, 17, 22 50, 51
Orowe 29
Osage 3
Ossete 11 40
Otoro 15
Ottawa 2 115, 119, 135
Ouma 25
Oyda 15
Oyrat 18, 22 53, 56, 57, 141
Ozomatlán Totonac 4
Paafang 27
Paakantyi 26
Pacahuara 7
Pacific Gulf Yupik 1

Index

Padam 20
Padoe 24
Padri 19
Páez 6 87
Paipai 2
Paite 20
Paiter 7
Paiwan 23
Pakan 23 72
Palaung 21, 23
Pale 21, 23
Palenque Creole 4, 6
Palikur 6 91
Paloor 13, 14
Palu’e 24
Palumata 24
Pana 13, 14
Panamahka 4
Panamanian Creole 4
Panamint 3
Panará 8
Panare 6
Panasuan 24
Pangvali 19
Panobo 7
Papantla Totonac 4
Papapana 28
Papi 25
Papora 23
Parachi 19 45
Pareci 7, 08
Parintintin 7
Parji 21
Parya 18, 19 44, 45
Pashayi 19 47
Pasi 20

Pasing 23 65
Patamona 6 91
Patani Malay 23, 24
Patla-Chicontla Totonac 4
Patua 23
Patwin 3
Paulohi 25
Paumarí 7
Paunaca 7
Pauwi 25
Pawnee 3 111
Pazeh 23 73
Pear 23
Pech 4
Peco’ Creole 24
Pemon 6 91
Pémono 6
Pendau 24
Pengo 21
Penrhyn 27
Pentlatch 2 119
Permyak 17 34, 36
Phalok 21, 23 67
Phalura 19 47
Phnong 23
Phom 20
Phong 23
Phula 23 69, 71, 130
Phunoi 23 65, 69
Phurhepecha 4
Phuthi 16
Piame 25
Piapoko 6
Piaroa 6
Picard 10 39
Picuris 3

Piedmontese 10 39
Pijao 6
Pije 29
Pilagá 9
Pingelapese 27
Pintupi 26 85
Pipil 4
Pirahã 7
Piratapuya 6
Piru 25
Pisaflores Tepehua 4
Pisamira 6
Pite Saami 1 35
Pitjantjatjara 26 83
Piu 25
Plains Cree 2
Plautdietsch 10 19, 35, 38
Pochuri 20
Poitevin-Saintongeais 10 39
Polci cluster 14
Polesian 10 37
Polonomombauk 29
Pong 23
Pontic Greek 11
Poqomam 4
Poqomchi’ 4
Potawatomi 2, 3 111, 119, 141
Poyanawa 7
Prasun 19 46
Provençal 10 39
Pu 21
Puari 25
Puebla Mazatec 5
Puinave 6
Pukapukan 27
Pukobyê 8

Pukur 14
Puluwat 27
Puma 20
Pume 6
Punan Batu 24
Pupeo 23 71
Purik 19
Purisimeño 3
Puruborá 7
Purum 20
Pwaamèi 29
Pwapwa 29
Pyu 25, 21, 23
Pyuma 23
Q’aanjob’al 4
Q’eqchi’ 4
Qawasqar 9
Qikiqtaaluk nigiani 1
Qikiqtaaluk uannangani 1
Quapaw 3
Quechan 3 111
Quechua 6, 7 16, 17, 86, 92,
93, 96, 98, 99, 100, 101, 103
Quechua of Ancash and
Huánuco 7
Quechua of Ayacucho 7
Quechua of Cajamarca 7
Quechua of Cajatambo, Pasco
and northern Junín 7
Quechua of Chachapoyas 7
Quechua of Cuzco 7
Quechua of Northern Bolivia 7
Quechua of Pacaraos 7
Quechua of Peruvian
Amazonia 6
Quechua of San Martín 7

149

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

150

Quechua of Santiago del
Estero 9
Quechua of Southern Bolivia 7
Quechua of Yauyos 7
Quichua 6 16, 93, 96, 97, 98,
101, 123, 132, 133
Quileute 2 111
Quinault 2
Qwarenya 15
Rabha 20
Rahambuu 24
Raji 20
Rama 4
Rama Cay Creole 4
Rangkas 19, 2
Rao 23 71
Rapa 27
Rapanui 27 78, 93, 141
Rarotongan 27
Raute 19, 2
Razihi 12
Red Gelao 23 68
Rembarrnga 26
Remo 21
Rengma 20
Repanbitip 29
Reshe 14
Resian 10
Resígaro 6 99
Reyesano 7
Rhenish Franconian 10
Riang 21, 23
Rigolet Inuktitut 1
Rikbaktsa 7, 8
Rio Grande Keresan 3 111
Ririo 28

Ritharrngu 26
River Guarijío 2
Romani 10 19, 35, 40
Romansh 10 39
Rongpo 19
Roshorvi 18, 19
Rotuman 27
Ruc 23
Ruga 20
Rukai 23
Rumai 21, 23
Rushani 18, 19 44
Rusyn 10 37
Rutul 11
Saaroa 23
Saba 14, 15
Sabanê 7
Sach 23
Saek 23 65, 68
Sahaptin 3 111
Saisiyat 23
Sak 21, 23 63, 66
Sakapultek 4
Sake 14
Sakurabiat 7
Salamãy 7
Salar 22 57
Salas 25
Sáliba 6
Saˉm 20
Samatao 23
Samatu 23
Sambe 14
Samei 23
Samosa 25
Sampang 20

Samrai 23
Samray 23
Samre 23
San Andres Creole 4, 06
San Dionisio del Mar Huave 5
San Francisco del Mar Huave 5
San Mateo del Mar Huave 5
Sanapaná 9
Sanema 6
Sanenyo 21
Sangkong 23 65
Sanglechi 18, 19 44
Sangtam 20
Sanhaja of Srair 10, 13
Santa 22 56
Santa María del Mar Huave 5
Sanyi 23
Saparua 25
Sapé 6 90
Saponi 25
Sarcee 2 119
Sarikoli 18, 19 58
Sarwa 14
Saryg Yugur 22 57
Sassarese 10 39
Sataˉr 20
Satawal 27
Saterlandic 10 37
Sauk-Fox 2
Saulteau 2 115
Sause 25
Savi 19 47
Savo 28
Sawkna 13
Sayultec 5
Scanian 10 38

Scots 10 37
Scottish Gaelic 10 38
Sechelt 2 119
Segeju 16
Sei 14
Sekani 2 119
Seke 19, 2
Semai 24
Semaq Beri 24
Semelai 24
Semnani 12 46
Senaya 12
Sene 25
Seneca 2 111
Sened 10, 13
Senggi 25
Sengmai 20
Sengseng 25
Sentilese 21 9
Sepa 25
Sera 25
Seri 2 107
Serili 25
Serrano 3 111
Seru 24
Seward Peninsula Inupiaq 1, 17
Shabo 15 23, 25
Shanenawa 7
Sharanahua 7
Shark Bay 29
Shatt 15
Shawnee 3 111
She 23 72, 123, 124
Sherdukpen 20
Sherpa 20
Shingsaba 20

Index

Shipibo-Conibo 7
Shira Yugur 22 56, 57
Shiwiar 6 97
Shixing 22 70
Shompen 21
Shor 17, 18, 22 51
Shoshoni 3 108, 142
Shuar chicham 6 97
Shughni 18, 19 44
Shumashti 19 47
Shuswap 2 119
Shwai 15
Sia Pedee 6 96, 97
Sian 24
Sibe 18
Siberian Tatar 17, 18 50
Sicilian 10, 13 39, 4
Sierra de Puebla Náhuatl 4
Sierra Otomí 4
Sierra Popoluca 5
Sierra Totonac 4
Sighu 14
Siglitun 1 118
Sikïiyana 6 91
Sikuani 6
Sila 23 65, 69
Simi 20
Singa 15
Singpho 22
Sinkiang Dagur 18
Siona / Secoya 6
Sioux 3
Sipakapense 4
Siraiya 23
Siriano 6
Sirionó 7

Sirmaudi 19
Sishee 29
Sissano 25
Siuslaw 3 109, 111
Sivandi 12 45
Siwi 13
Ske 29
Skolt Saami 1, 17 35, 36
Slovincian 10
So-ng 23
Sobei 25
Sogoo 15
Soi 12 45
Solon 22 54, 58
Somm 25
Somyev 14
Sonora Lower Pima 2
Sonsorol 27
Soo 15
Soqotri 12
Sora 21
Sorbian 10 18, 34, 37
Sorsorian 29
South Italian 10 39, 4
South Jutish 10 34, 38
South Saami 10 35
South Slavey 1 115, 119, 121
Southeastern Pomo 3
Southeastern Tarahumara 2
Southern Altay 17, 18, 22
Southern Ayta 23
Southern Chocho 5
Southern East Cree 2
Southern Haida 1
Southern Khanty 17
Southern Mansi 17

Southern Paiute 3
Southern Pomo 3
Southern Selkup 17
Southern Sierra Miwok 3
Southern Tiwa 3
Southern Tlapanec 5
Southern Tujia 22 70
Southern Tutchone 1
Southern Zoque 4
Southwestern Tepehuan 4
Southwestern Tlapanec 4
Sowa 29
Soyaltepec Mazatec 5
Soyot 17, 22 57
Spiti 19
Spokane 2 111
Squamish 2 119
Stieng 23
Stoney 2 115, 119
Straits Salish 2 119
Suarmin 25
Suba 15
Subtiaba 4
Sulung 20
Sumariup 25
Sunwar 20
Surel 20
Suret 12 41
Suruahá 7
Susuami 25
Svan 11 41
Swampy Cree 2
Swoeng 23
Taa 16
Taap 25
Taba 24

Tabasaran 11
Tabasco Náhuatl 4
Tacana 7
Tacenwit 10, 13 29
Tafi 14
Tagargrent 13
Tagin 20
Tagish 1 119
Tagoi 15
Tahltan 1
Tai Daeng 23 65, 68
Tai Neua 23 65, 68
Tai Nora 20
Tai Phake 20
Tai Rong 20
Taiap 25
Taikat 25
Tailoi 23
Taje 24
Tajio 24
Takahanyilang 21
Talodi 15
Taloki 24
Talondo 24
Talu 22
Talysh 12, 18 41
Tamaceq 13 29
Tamahaq 13
Tamajeq 13 27, 29
Taman 20
Tamang 20 59
Tamazight 10, 13 26, 27, 28,
29, 127
Tambotalo 29
Tamki 14, 15
Tamzabit 13 29

151

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

152

Tanacross 1
Tanaina 1
Tanana 1
Tandia 25
Tanema 28
Tangam 20
Tangkhul 20
Tanglang 23
Tangsa 20
Tangwang 22
Tanimbili 28
Tanimuca-Letuama 6
Taokas 23
Taos 3
Tapayuna 8
Tape 29
Tapieté 9 93
Tapirapé 8
Tarao 20
Tariana 6
Taroko 23 73
Tarpia 25
Taruang 20
Taruma 6 91
Tasnusit 13
Tat 11 40
Tati 12, 18
Tatuyo 6
Taulil 25
Tause 25
Taushiro 6 99
Tawahka 4
Taworta 25
Tayal 23
Tayurayt 10, 13
Taznatit 13 29

Tazy 17, 22
Tchitchege 14
Tchumbuli 14
Te’un 25
Teanu 28
Tecóatl Mazatec 5
Tehuelche 9 92
Teko 4
Tektitek 4
Tembé 8
Temein 15
Temiar 24
Tempuan 23
Temuan 24 66
Tench 25
Tenharim 7
Tennet 15
Ter Saami 1, 17 35
Terena 8, 9
Teribe 4
Tese 15
Tetete 6
Tetserret 13, 14 29
Tewa 3
Texistepecan 5
Thaayorre 26
Thado 20
Thakali 19, 2
Thangmi 20
Thao 23
Tharkarri 26
Thavung 23 68, 69
Theen 23
Thompson 2 119, 135
Thulung 20
Thuri 15

Tialo 24
Ticuna 6, 7 87, 89, 142
Tidikelt 13
Tilapa Otomí 4
Tillamook 3
Tilung 20
Tima 15
Tinan 19
Tindi 11
Tingal 15
Tinigua 6 87
Tipai 3
Tirahi 19
Tiri 29
Tirma 15
Tiwa 20
Tiwi 25
Tlachichilco Tepehua 4
Tlahuica 4
Tlingit 1 115, 119
Toba 9 92
Toba-Maskoy 9
Tobada’ 24
Tobati 25
Tobian 25
Tocho 15
Toda 21
Tofa 17, 22 51, 57
Tofanma 25
Togoyo 15
Töitschu 10
Tokelauan 27
Tol 4
Tolcha 19, 2
Tolomako 29
Tolowa 3

Tomadino 24
Tombelala 24
Tonjon 14
Torá 7
Toram 15
Toratán 24
Torlak 10 37
Torwali 19 47
Toto 20
Totoli 24
Totoró 6
Touggourt Tamazight 13
Transylvanian Saxon 10
Trio 6 91
Triw 23
Trukhmen 11
Trumai 8 89
Ts’amay 15
Ts’ixa 16
Tsafiki 6
Tsakhur 11
Tsakonian 10, 13 33, 4
Tsetsaut 1 119
Tsez 11 42
Tshangla 20 61
Tsimshian 1 115
Tsou 23
Tsum 19, 2
Tuahka 4
Tuamotuan 27 78
Tubatulabal 3
Tucano 6
Tule-Kaweah Yokuts 3
Tulishi 15
Tulu 21
Tum 23

Index

Tumtum 15
Tundra Enets 1, 17 17
Tundra Nenets 1, 17 17, 35,
49, 50, 51, 52, 124
Tundra Yukagir 1, 17
Tunebo 6
Tunica 2 109
Tunisian Judeo-Arabic 12, 13
Tuotomb 14
Tupari 7
Turaka 25
Turi 21
Turoyo 12 41
Tuscarora 2
Tutuba 29
Tututni 3
Tuvaluan 27
Tuvan 17, 22 50, 57
Tuwuli 14
Tuyuca 6
Tuzantec 4
Twana 2
Tz’utujil 4
U 23
Ubi 14, 15
Ubykh 11, 10, 13 35, 41
Udege 1, 17, 22 49, 51, 54,
143
Udi 11
Udmurt 17, 18
Uhunduni 25
Ujir 25
Ukhwejo 14
Ulcha 1, 17, 22 51
Ulithian 27
Ulwa 4

Ume Saami 1 35
Umpila 26
Umutina 7, 08
Unami 2
Upland Yuman 3
Upper Chehalis 3
Upper Kuskokwim 1
Upper Tanana 1
Upper Umpqua 3
Ura 29
Urak Lawoi 23, 24, 21
Urarina 6, 07
Uru 7 87
Uru-eu-au-au 7
Uruak 6 90
Uruava 28
Urum 10
Urupá 7
Ushojo 19 47
Usku 25
Uspantek 4
Usu 25
Ute 3
Utsat 23 71
Vacacocha 6
Vafsi 12 45
Valle Nacional Chinantec 5
Valley Yokuts 3
Vano 28
Vedda 21 63
Vehes 25
Venetan 10 35, 39
Ventureño 3
Veps 10 36
Vera’a 28
Vidunda 16

Vilamovian 10
Vilela 9 92
Voh-Koné dialects 29
Vojvodina Rusyn 10
Volow 28
Võro-Seto 10 36
Vote 10 36
Vumbu 14
Wa 23 72
Waanyi 26
Wab 25
Wagiman 26
Waigali 19 46
Waima’a 24
Waimirí-Atroarí 6
Waiwai 6 91
Wajãpi 6
Wajarri 26
Wakhi 18, 19 44, 58
Wali 15
Walloon 10 39
Walmajarri 26
Wambaya 26
Wambule 20
Wampis 6
Wanai 6
Wanano / Kotiria 6
Wancho 20
Wangaaybuwan 26
Wangkumara 26
Wanka Quechua 7
Wano 25
Waotededo 6 97, 98
Wapishana 6 91
Wappo 3
Warao 6 90, 91

Warapu 25
Wardaman 26
Warekena 6
Wari 7, 25
Warlpiri 26 82, 85
Warnang 15
Warnman 26
Waru 24
Warumungu 26
Washo 3 109, 111
Wauja 8
Waunana 6, 4
Waxiang 22
Wayana 6
Welsh 10 38, 4
West Flemish 10 34, 37
West Frisian 10 32, 37
West Greenlandic 1
Western Abenaki 2 119
Western Apache 3
Western Armenian 12, 1 40
Western Cham 23 65
Western Chocho 5
Western Mansi 17
Western Mari 10, 18 36
Western Mazahua 4
Western Mazatec 5
Western Montagnais 2
Western Náhuatl 4
Western Neo-Aramaic 12
Western Otomí 4
Western Popoloc 5
Western Tarahumara 2
Western Tlapanec 4
Western Zoque 4
White Gelao 22, 23 68

153

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

154

Wichi 9 17
Wichita 3
Wik Mungkan 26
Wik Ngathan 26
Wik Ngencherr 26
Winnebago 3, 02 111
Wintu-Nomlaki 3
Wiradjuri 26
Wiyot 3 109, 111
Woleaian 27
Woods Cree 2
Woria 25
Worrorra 26
Wotapuri-Katarqalai 19
Wotu 24
Wunai Bunu 23
Wunambal 26
Wuse 23 72
Wutun 22
Xakriabá 8
Xambioá 8
Xaragure 29
Xavante 8
Xerente 8
Xetá 9
Xinka 4
Xipáya 6, 08 89
Xiri 16
Xokleng 9
Yaaku 15
Yaeyama 23
Yaghnobi 18, 19 44, 45
Yagua 6
Yahgan 9 87, 93
Yakkha 20 60
Yakut 1, 17 50, 51, 52, 54

Yameo 6, 07
Yami 23
Yaminahua 7
Yamphu 20
Yan-nhangu 26 81, 131
Yanesha 7
Yangkam 14
Yankunytjatjara 26
Yanomám 6
Yanomami 6
Yanyuwa 26
Yapunda 25
Yaqui 3, 02
Yarawata 25
Yarawi 25
Yasa 14
Yatê 8 88
Yavapai 3
Yaw 21, 23
Yawalapiti 8 89
Yawanawá 7
Yawarana 6
Yazgulami 18, 19
Yazva Komi 17 36
Yecuana 6
Yem 15
Yerong 23 71
Yeyi 16
Yiddish 10, 12 19, 35, 37
Yidgha 19
Yiiji 26
Yimas 25
Yimchungru 20
Yine 7
Yir Yoront 26
Yoba 25

Yoki 25
Yonaguni 23
Younuo Bunu 23
Yucatec 4
Yuchi 3 109, 111
Yucuna 6
Yudja 8
Yug 17
Yuhup 6
Yuki 7, 03
Yukpa 6
Yulu 15
Yuracaré 7
Yurok 3 111
Yurt Tatar 10, 18
Yurutí 6
Zaiwa 22 70
Zangskari 19
Zaozou 23
Zaparo 6 97, 98, 101
Zapotec of Asunción
Tlacolulita 5
Zapotec of Mixtepe 5
Zapotec of Petapa 5
Zapotec of San Antonino el
Alto 5
Zapotec of San Bartolo
Yautepec 5
Zapotec of San Felipe
Tejalapan 5
Zapotec of the Southern
mountains, eastern
lowlands 5
Zapotec of the Southern
mountains, northeast 5

Zapotec of the Southern
mountains, northwest
lowlands 5
Zapotec of the Valleys north 5
Zapotec of the Valleys,
central 5
Zapotec of the Valleys, middle
northwest 5
Zapotec of the Valleys, west 5
Zapotec of Zimatlán de
Álvarez 5
Zaramo 16 20
Zay 15 24
Zazaki 12 40
Zazao 28
Zeem 14
Zeme 20
Zenaga 13 29
Zenatiya 10, 13
Zhaba 22 70
Zidgali 12
Zirenkel 14, 15
Zo’é 6
Zoró 7
Zumaya 14
Zuni 3 109, 111
||Ani 16
||Gana 16
||Ku ||’e 16
||Kx’au 16
||Xegwi 16
||Hoa 16

Atlas of the World’s
Languages in Danger

Maps

The authors are responsible for the choice and the presentation of the facts
contained in this publication and for the opinions expressed therein, which
are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this
publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the
part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city
or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or
boundaries.
Published by
the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization
7, place de Fontenoy
75352 Paris 07 SP

UNESCO wishes to acknowledge the generous support of the Government
of Norway for the publication of this Atlas, in its print and digital forms.

© UNESCO 1st edition 1996, 2nd edition 2001, 3rd edition 2010
All rights reserved

Printed by Imprimerie Leclerc, Abbeville

ISBN 978-92-3-104096-2

Typeset by Jacqueline Gensollen-Bloch, UNESCO Publishing
Copy edited by Jana Gough

Third edition 2010
Printed in France

Atlas of the World’s
Languages in Danger
Third edition, entirely revised, enlarged and updated
Editor-in-Chief: Christopher Moseley
Cartographer: Alexandre Nicolas

UNESCO
Publishing
United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

Memory of Peoples Series

This publication has been prepared with the greatest possible care.
However, it may be that a few errors have escaped our attention.
We thank our readers in advance for indicating to us any error or inconsistency,
so that we could improve subsequent editions of this work.

Guide to Maps
150°W

120°W

90°W

60°W

30°W

0°

30°E

60°E

90°E

120°E

150°E

180°E

01

17

!

60°N

!

!

!!

!

!

!
!

!

!

!
!

30°N
!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!
!
! !
! ! ! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
! !
!
!
!
!
!! !
!! ! ! !
! ! !!
!!
! !! ! !
! !
!
! !! !!!!!
!! !! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
!
!!!
!!
! !! !
!!! ! !! ! ! ! !
!!
!
! !!!!! !
! !
!!!!!!!!! !
!!! !
! !!
!!! !!!! ! ! ! !! !! !!!!!!!
!!!! !! !!! !
!! ! ! !
!
!!! ! ! !
! !
!!!!!! ! !
!
!

!

0°

!
!

30°S

!
!
! !
!
!!
! ! !
!!!
!

!
!
! !!
!
!
! !! !
!!!!!! ! !
!
! ! !! !

03!
!!

!

!

!

! !
! !! ! ! !
!
!!
! !!
!!
! !!! ! ! ! !! ! !
!
!
!
!

!

!

!
!

! !
!

02

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!!!!!! !!!
! !
! ! ! !!!!!!!!!!!!!!! ! !! ! !! ! !
! !!!!!!!!!!!!!! ! !!!!!! !!!!!! !
!
!! !!!!!!! ! !!!!
! ! !! ! !
!
! !!!!!! ! ! !!!!! !!
!!!! !! ! !
! !
! ! !
! ! ! ! ! ! !! !
! ! ! ! !!! ! !! !!!!!! ! !!!!!! ! ! ! !!!
! ! ! ! ! ! !! !
!! !
!!!! !!!! !! !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! ! ! ! ! ! !! !!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !
!!! !!!! ! !! !!!!! !! !! !!!!!
! ! ! !! ! !! !!!
!
! !!!!! !!! !!!!!! !
! ! ! ! !!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !!! ! !!! !!! !! !!! !!!!! ! !!!! ! ! !
!!
! !! !! ! !!!!!! ! !! !!!
! ! ! !!!! ! !! ! ! ! !!! !!! !!! !!! ! ! !!!!!! !
! ! ! ! ! !! ! ! !!! ! !!
!
!! !!! !! !
!
!
!
!
!
!! !! ! ! ! ! ! !
!
! ! ! ! !
!! !
! ! !!! ! ! !! !
! !!
! !!! !! ! !
!
!
!
!

!

04

!
!
13
!

06

07

!

!

!

!

!

!!! ! !!
!!!
!
!!!

14
!

!

!
!

!!
! !

!
!

!

!

!
! !
! !
!
!
!

!!

!!
!! !
!
! ! !!
! !
!
! !!
! !
!
!! ! ! ! !! ! !
!!
! !
! !
! !!
! ! ! ! !! !! !!! !! !! !! ! ! ! ! !
! ! ! !
!
! !!!
!
!
! ! !!
!
!
!! ! ! !! ! !!!
! !!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!!
!!! !! ! !
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!

!

!

!

!

!
!! !
!
! !

!

! !

! !!

!

! !
!

!

!

!

!

!

! !
!

!

18

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!
!
!!
!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!
! !

! !!

!

!

!

!

!
!!

!

!

!!! !
22
!!
! !
! !

!

!

!

!
! !

!
!!

! !

!

!! !

!

!!

!!
!

!

!
!
!
!
!
!
!! !
!
!
!
!!!!
!
!
!!! !!!!! !!!!!!!!
!
!
! !!!!!
!
!
!
!!!
!!
!
!!
!
! ! ! ! !!
!! !
!
!
! ! !! ! !
! ! !!!! ! !!
!
!!!!!
!
! !! !
!
!
! !!!!! !!! !!!!
!
!!
! ! !! !
!
!
!! !!!
!
!
!
!!!
!
!! ! !
!
! ! !!
!!
! !!!! ! !!!!
!
!
!!! !!!!!!!!!!!!!!! !! !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! ! !! !! !! !!!
! !
!
!!! !!! !! ! !!!!!!!!!!! !!! ! !! ! ! !!! !
!
!
! !!!!!!!! !! ! ! ! ! !!!! ! ! ! !!! !
!!
!!! ! ! !
!!
!!
!! ! ! ! !!!!! ! ! ! !
!!!!!!!!
! ! ! ! ! !!!!!!!!
!!! ! !!! !!!!!!!!!!!! !! !!! ! !
!
!
! ! !!!!!
! !! !! ! !!!!!! ! !
!
! !
! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! ! !!!
!!!
!
!
!!
!! ! !! !!
! !!!!
!
!
!
!
!!! ! ! !!
! ! ! !!
!
! !!!
!!!
!!!
!
! ! !!! !! ! ! !!!!! !!!!!!!!!! !! ! !!!!!!!!! !! ! ! ! !
! !!
! !
!
!!! !
! ! !! ! !
!
! ! ! !!!! ! ! !! ! ! !!!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
! ! !
! !! !!
!
! !!!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
! ! !
!
!
! ! !! !
!
!
!!!!!!!
! !!! ! ! !!! ! ! !
! !!!! !!
!!
!
!! !
!
!!!! !
!! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!! ! !
! ! !!
!
!
!!!!! ! !! ! ! ! ! !!!! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!
!
!
!
! !
!!!
!! ! !!!!!! ! !!! !!!! !! !!! !! ! !!!!! !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! !!!!!!! ! ! ! ! !
!! !! !
!
! !! !!
!
!! ! !! ! !!!!!!!! ! !! ! !! !
! !
!! ! ! !!
! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !! !! ! ! !! ! ! ! !!!
! !!!!! !
!!
! ! ! !! !!
!
!
!!
! !!! !!!! !
!
! !!!!
!!! ! ! ! !!! !
!! !
!!!!!
!
! ! !! !! ! ! !!! ! ! !!!! !!
!
!!
! !
! !! ! ! ! ! ! !!! ! !
!
!! !!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!!!! !
!! !!! ! ! ! ! ! !
!! !
! ! !!
!
!
! !
!
! !
!
!
!
! !
!
! ! !
!
!
!
!
!
!
! !!
!!
!
!
!!
!! !
!
! !!!
!
! !!

11

19

20

27

23

12

21

25

15

24

16

!
! !

27

28

26

!

!

!

29

!

!

!
!

09
60°S

10

!

!

!
!
!

!

!

08

!

!

!

!

!

05

!

!

!

!

!
!

01 : Arctic Circumpolar

10 : Europe

17 : North-eastern Asia

22 : Eastern Asia

02 : Southern Canada, United States, Northern Mexico

11 : Caucasus

18 : Central Asia

23 : South-eastern Asia

03 : Western United States

12 : Middle East

19 : Western Himalaya

24 : Western Austronesia

04 : Central America

13 : Northern Africa

20 : Central Himalaya

25 : New Guinea

05 : Central Mexico

14 : Western Africa

21 : Indian Subcontinent

26 : Australia

06 : Northern South America

15 : Eastern Africa

27 : Pacifique

07 : Western South America

16 : Southern Africa

28 : Solomon Islands and Northern Vanuatu

08 : Eastern South America

29 : Southern Vanuatu and New Caledonia

09 : Southern South America

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Map 1

Arctic Circumpolar
Ahtna (USA)
Ainu (3) (JPN; RUS)
Aivilingmiutut (CAN)
Akkala Saami (RUS)
Aleut (3) (RUS; USA)
Alutor (RUS)
Arman (RUS)
Baraba Tatar (RUS)
Carrier (CAN)
Central Alaskan Yupik (2)

Forest Yukagir (RUS)
Gitksan (CAN)
Gwich’in (2) (CAN; USA)
Haisla (CAN)
Han (2) (CAN; USA)
Holikachuk (USA)
Inari Saami (FIN)
Ingalik (USA)
Inuinnaqtun (CAN)
Itelmen (RUS)
(USA)
Kaska (CAN)
Central Siberian Yupik (2) (RUS; Kerek (RUS)
USA)
Kildin Saami (RUS)
Chukchi (RUS)
Kili (RUS)
Chulym Turk (RUS)
Kivallirmiutut (CAN)
Copper Island Aleut (RUS)
Koryak (RUS)
Dogrib (CAN)
Koyukon (USA)
Dolgan (RUS)
Lule Saami (NOR; SWE)
East Cape Yupik (RUS)
Michif (CAN)
East Greenlandic (GRL)
Nanay (CHN; RUS)
Even (2) (RUS)
Naskapi (CAN)
Evenki (RUS)
Natsilingmiutut (CAN)
Eyak (USA)
Negidal (RUS)
Forest Enets (RUS)
Nganasan (RUS)

Nisga’a (CAN)
Nivkh (2) (RUS)
North Alaskan Inupiaq (3)
(CAN; USA)

North Greenlandic (GRL)
North Saami (FIN; NOR; RUS; SWE)
North Slavey (CAN)
Northern Haida (CAN; USA)
Northern Selkup (RUS)
Northern Tutchone (CAN)
Nunatsiavummiutut (CAN)
Nunavimmiutitut (CAN)
Old Sirenik (RUS)
Oroch (RUS)
Orok (RUS)
Pacific Gulf Yupik (USA)
Pite Saami (NOR; SWE)
Qikiqtaaluk nigiani (CAN)
Qikiqtaaluk uannangani
(CAN)

Rigolet Inuktitut (CAN)
Seward Peninsula Inupiaq (4)
(RUS; USA)

Skolt Saami (FIN; NOR; RUS)
South Slavey (CAN)
Southern Haida (CAN)
Southern Tutchone (CAN)
Tagish (CAN)
Tahltan (CAN)
Tanacross (USA)
Tanaina (USA)
Tanana (USA)
Ter Saami (RUS)
Tlingit (2) (CAN; USA)
Tsetsaut (CAN)
Tsimshian (CAN)
Tundra Enets (RUS)
Tundra Nenets (RUS)
Tundra Yukagir (RUS)
Udege (RUS)
Ulcha (RUS)
Ume Saami (SWE)
Upper Kuskokwim (USA)
Upper Tanana (CAN; USA)
West Greenlandic (GRL)
Yakut (RUS)

Siglitun (CAN)

6
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Arctic Circumpolar Map 1
140°E
Ainu

JAPAN
Sa
kh a

100°E

80°E
Dudinka

Yakutsk

Dolgan

Len
a

Yakut

Nivkh

Tundra
Enets
Nganasan

lin Evenki Orok

RUSSIAN

Magadan

Laptev
Sea

m

a

Ume
Saami

SWEDEN
WE
NORWAY
0°

Spitsbergen

Tundra
Yukagir

Palana
Alutor

Aleut

Lule
Saami

North Saami

N

Petropavloski
Kamchatskiy

Inari
Saami

Skolt Saami

70°

Ko
ly

Even

FINLAND

Pite
Saami

Forest
Yukagir

Itelmen

Copper Island
Aleut

Sea
Novaya
Zemlya

Even

FEDERATION

Arman

Akkala
Saami

Ter Saami
Kildin
Saami
Barents

Kara
Sea

Sea of
Okhotsk

160°E

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Negidal

Oroch
Ulcha
Nivkh

Ainu

60°E
Tundra Nenets

Forest Enets

Nanay

Sapporo
Ainu

120°E

50°N

Kili

Udege

East Siberian
Sea

Koryak

Europe map

ICELAND

ARCTIC

Chukchi

Kerek

REYKJAVÍK

Central
Siberian Yupik

Old Sirenik

180°

North Greenlandic

OCEAN

East Greenlandic

Pituffik

Aleut
Central Alaskan Yupik

eut
Al

Holikachuk

Central Alaskan Yupik

ia n

Aleut

Is

lan
ds

USA

Ingalik

Upper
Kuskokwim

USA

Nisga'a

Gwich’in

Tanana
Tanacross

Tanaina
Ahtna

Alaska

Tahltan
Tsetsaut

Eyak

Gulf of
Alaska

Tsimshian
Northern Haida

Beaufort
Sea
Siglitun

Han

500 km

Northern
Tutchone
Southern
Tutchone
Kaska
Tagish

140°W

sland

Vulnerable

Nuuk

Victoria
Island

Inuinnaqtun

Qikiqtaaluk nigiani
Natsilingmiutut

North Slavey

Nunatsiavummiutut

CANADA

Yellowknife
Kivallirmiutut

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Labrador
Sea

Iqaluit
Aivilingmiutut

Dogrib

South Slavey

50°N

West
Greenlandic

Qikiqtaaluk
uannangani

North Alaskan
Inupiaq

Tlingit

Haisla

Baffin I

Gwich’in

Upper Tanana

CAN.

Southern Haida

Koyukon

enzie
Mack

Gulf of
Alaska

0

North Alaskan
Inupiaq

Pacific Gulf Yupik

160°W

ATLANTIC

Greenland

East Cape Yupik
Seward Peninsula Inupiaq

Hudson
Bay 80°W

Nunavimmiutitut
Naskapi

Language Vitality

Bering
Sea

20°W

OCEAN

Anadyr

Definitely
endangered

Severely
endangered

Critically
endangered

ut
Rigolet Inuktitut

CANADA

Extinct
(since the 1950s)

Map 2

Southern Canada / United States / Northern Mexico
Arikara (USA)
Assiniboine (2) (CAN; USA)
Atikamekw (CAN)
Beaver (CAN)
Bella Coola (CAN)
Blackfoot (2) (CAN; USA)
Bungee (CAN)
Carrier (CAN)
Catawba (USA)
Cayuga (CAN)
Central Ojibwe (CAN)
Cherokee (USA)
Chihuahua Lower Pima

Hidatsa (USA)
Huron-Wyandot (CAN)
Kalispel (USA)
Kickapoo (2) (MEX; USA)
Klallam (USA)
Kutenai (CAN; USA)
Kwak’wala (CAN; USA)
Lakota (CAN)
Lillooet (CAN)
Lushootseed (USA)
Makah (USA)
Malecite (CAN; USA)
Maliseet-Passamaquoddy

(MEX)

(USA)

Chilcotin (CAN)
Choctaw (2) (USA)
Columbian (USA)
Comox/Sliammon (CAN)
Dakota (CAN)
Dene (CAN)
Eastern Abenaki (USA)
Eastern Montagnais (CAN)
Eastern Ojibwe (CAN)
Gitksan (CAN)
Gros Ventre (USA)
Haisla (CAN)
Halkomelem (CAN; USA)
Heiltsuk (CAN)

Mandan (USA)
Maniwaki Algonquin (CAN)
Mayo (MEX)
Menominee (USA)
Michif (CAN)
Micmac (2) (CAN; USA)
Mikasuki (USA)
Mohawk (5) (CAN; USA)
Montana Salish (USA)
Moose Cree (CAN)
Mountain Guarijío (MEX)
Munsee (2) (CAN; USA)
Naskapi (CAN)
Natchez (USA)

Nisga’a (CAN)
Nooksack (USA)
Nootka (CAN)
Northern Algonquin (CAN)
Northern East Cree (CAN)
Northern Straits Salish (USA)
Northern Tepehuán (MEX)
Northwestern Ojibwe (CAN)
Northwestern Tarahumara
(MEX)

Nunatsiavummiutut (CAN)
Nunavimmiutitut (CAN)
Oji-Cree (CAN)
Okanagan (CAN; USA)
Oneida (3) (CAN; USA)
Onondaga (2) (CAN; USA)
Ottawa (3) (CAN; USA)
Paipai (MEX)
Pentlatch (CAN)
Plains Cree (CAN)
Potawatomi (3) (CAN; USA)
Quileute (USA)
Quinault (USA)
River Guarijío (MEX)
Sarcee (CAN)
Sauk-Fox (USA)
Saulteau (CAN)
Sechelt (CAN)

Sekani (CAN)
Seneca (2) (CAN; USA)
Seri (MEX)
Shuswap (CAN)
Sonora Lower Pima (MEX)
Southeastern Tarahumara
(MEX)

Southern East Cree (CAN)
Spokane (USA)
Squamish (CAN)
Stoney (CAN)
Straits Salish (CAN; USA)
Swampy Cree (CAN)
Thompson (CAN)
Tunica (USA)
Tuscarora (2) (CAN; USA)
Twana (USA)
Unami (USA)
Western Abenaki (2) (CAN;
USA)

Western Montagnais (CAN)
Western Tarahumara (MEX)
Winnebago (USA)
Woods Cree (CAN)
Yaqui (MEX)

8
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Southern Canada / United States / Northern Mexico Map 2
120°W

110°W

100°W

90°W

80°W

70°W

60°W

Nunavimmiutitut
Sekani

Hudson Bay

Bella Coola
Chilcotin

Shuswap

S

Nootka
Makah
Quileute
Quinault
Comox/
Sliammon
Halkomelem

Michif

Calgary

Squamish
Straits Salish

Southern East Cree

Blackfoot

Saulteau

Assiniboine

Hidatsa

Gros Ventre

Montana Salish

Winnipeg

Dakota

Lakota

Bungee

M

ri
ou
iss
M

Sna
ke

Atikamekw

La
Sup ke
erio
r

Bismarck

a
mbi
Colu

Potawatomi
Menominee

iss

iss

ip

pi

Ottawa

Lake
Potawatomi Huron

Winnebago

40°N

Maniwaki
Algonquin

rie
eE
Lak

Munsee
Unami

Charlotte

Co
lo
ra
do

Ri
an
Gr

Western United States map

de

Yaqui
Mayo

New York

Atlantic

40°N

Ocean

Catawba

Vulnerable

CANADA Onondaga

Seneca
Oneida
Ottawa

Tuscarora

Mohawk
Munsee Cayuga
Potawatomi

Choctaw

U. S. A.

Tunica

Kickapoo

Northwestern
Tarahumara
Kickapoo
Western Tarahumara
Northern Tepehuán
River
Guarijío
Southeastern Tarahumara

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status
of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Cherokee

Natchez

o

Ocean

Hermosillo

Western Abenaki
Micmac

Oneida

Nashville

El Paso

Paipai

Eastern
Abenaki

Mohawk

Ohio

s

Dallas

Pacific

MaliseetPassamaquoddy

WASHINGTON

Memphis

20°N

Micmac
Malecite

Seneca

St. Louis

Mountain
Sonora Guarijío
Chihuahua
Lower Pima
Lower Pima

Quebec

Eastern
Ojibwe Onondaga

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Santa Fe

Seri

ce
en

Ottawa

Lake
Michigan

Arkansa

wr
La

Montréal

Denver
San Francisco

HuronWyandot

Mohawk OTTAWA

Oneida

Sauk-Fox Chicago

Salt Lake City

Western Montagnais

Northern Algonquin

Arikara

Mandan

Eastern Montagnais

Central Ojibwe

Regina

Kutenai

Spokane
Columbian
Klallam
Lushootseed Northern Straits
Twana
Salish

Moose Cree
Northwestern Ojibwe

Assiniboine

Sarcee

Okanagan
Thompson
Kalispel
Nooksack

Northern East Cree

Oji-Cree

Lake
Winnipeg

tch
aska

Stoney

Naskapi
Swampy
Cree

ewan

Sechelt
Lillooet

Heiltsuk
Kwak'wala
Pentlatch

Woods Cree

CANADA

Carrier

St

Nisga'a
Haisla

Nunatsiavummiutut

Dene

Plains Cree

Peace

Gulf of

Language Vitality

Beaver

Gitksan

Definitely
endangered

Severely
endangered

Critically
endangered

Tampa

Mexico

MEXICO
100°W

Mikasuki
0

250

500 km

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Miami

NASSAU

70°W

Extinct
(since the 1950s)

Map 3

Western United States
Achumawi (USA)
Acoma-Laguna (USA)
Alabama (USA)
Antoniano (USA)
Arapaho (2) (USA)
Atsugewi (USA)
Barbareño (USA)
Caddo (USA)
Cahuilla (USA)
Cayuga (USA)
Cayuse (USA)
Central Kalapuyan (USA)
Central Pomo (USA)
Central Sierra Miwok (USA)
Chemehuevi (USA)
Cherokee (USA)
Cheyenne (2) (USA)
Chickasaw (USA)
Chinook Jargon (USA)
Chiwere (USA)
Choctaw (USA)
Cocopa (2) (MEX; USA)
Coeur d’Alene (USA)
Comanche (USA)
Cowlitz (USA)
Creek (USA)
Crow (USA)
Cupeño (USA)
Eastern Pomo (USA)
Eel River Athabaskan (USA)
Hanis (USA)
Havasupai (USA)
Hopi (USA)

Hualapai (USA)
Hupa (USA)
Huron-Wyandot (USA)
Ineseño (USA)
Ipai (USA)
Island Chumash (USA)
Jemez (USA)
Jicarilla Apache (USA)
Kansa (USA)
Karuk (USA)
Kashaya (USA)
Kato (USA)
Kawaiisu (USA)
Kickapoo (2) (USA)
Kiksht (USA)
Kiliwa (MEX)
Kings River Yokuts (USA)
Kiowa (USA)
Kiowa Apache (USA)
Klamath-Modoc (USA)
Koasati (2) (USA)
Konkow (USA)
Konomihu (USA)
Lake Miwok (USA)
Lipan (USA)
Lower Chehalis (USA)
Luiseño (USA)
Maidu (USA)
Maricopa (USA)
Mattole (USA)
Mescalero-Chiricahua
Apache (2) (USA)
Miami-Illinois (USA)

Migueleño (USA)
Mohave (2) (USA)
Molala (USA)
Mono (2) (USA)
Navajo (USA)
New River Shasta (USA)
Nez Perce (USA)
Nisenan (USA)
Northeastern Pomo (USA)
Northern Paiute (3) (USA)
Northern Pomo (USA)
Northern Sierra Miwok
(USA)

O’odham (3) (MEX; USA)
Obispeño (USA)
Ojibwe (USA)
Omaha-Ponca (USA)
Osage (USA)
Panamint (USA)
Patwin (USA)
Pawnee (USA)
Picuris (USA)
Potawatomi (2) (USA)
Purisimeño (USA)
Quapaw (USA)
Quechan (USA)
Rio Grande Keresan (USA)
Sahaptin (USA)
Serrano (USA)
Shawnee (USA)
Shoshoni (3) (USA)
Sioux (USA)
Siuslaw (USA)

Southeastern Pomo (USA)
Southern Paiute (USA)
Southern Pomo (USA)
Southern Sierra Miwok
(USA)

Southern Tiwa (USA)
Taos (USA)
Tewa (2) (USA)
Tillamook (USA)
Tipai (2) (MEX; USA)
Tolowa (USA)
Tubatulabal (USA)
Tule-Kaweah Yokuts (USA)
Tututni (USA)
Upland Yuman (USA)
Upper Chehalis (USA)
Upper Umpqua (USA)
Ute (3) (USA)
Valley Yokuts (USA)
Ventureño (USA)
Wappo (USA)
Washo (USA)
Western Apache (USA)
Wichita (USA)
Winnebago (USA)
Wintu-Nomlaki (USA)
Wiyot (USA)
Yaqui (USA)
Yavapai (USA)
Yuchi (USA)
Yuki (USA)
Yurok (USA)
Zuni (USA)

10
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Western United States Map 3
120°W

Upper Chehalis

110°W

100°W

Nez Perce

Lower
Chehalis

Cowlitz

Ojibwe

a
mbi
Colu

Tillamook

Crow

New River Shasta

45°N
Chinook
Jargon Molala

Cheyenne

45°N

Cayuse

Sahaptin
Kiksht

Hanis

Central Kalapuyan
Upper Umpqua
Siuslaw
Tututni
Tolowa
Hupa

Coeur d’Alene

Northern
Paiute

Northern Paiute

Klamath-Modoc

Arapaho

Northern
Paiute

M
Shoshoni

Sna
ke

iss

ou

Sioux

Shoshoni

ri

UNITED STATES OF

Karuk

Winnebago

Omaha-Ponca

Konomihu
Atsugewi
Achumawi
Eel
River
Wiyot
Maidu
Athabaskan
40°N
Wintu-Nomlaki
Northern
Kato Pomo
Konkow
Mattole

Eastern
Pomo

Nisenan
Patwin
Lake
Miwok

Southern
Pomo

Yuki

Southern Sierra
Miwok

Language Vitality

Havasupai

Panamint
Tule-Kaweah Yokuts

Tewa

Kawaiisu

Ventureño

Mohave
Serrano

Ipai

Quechan

Comanche

Potawatomi

Mescalero-Chiricahua
Apache
Western Apache

35°N

Chickasaw
Choctaw
Caddo

Wichita

Mescalero-Chiricahua
Apache

Lipan

Cayuga

Kickapoo
Shawnee

Cocopa

Tijuana

Yaqui

Tipai

El Paso

O’odham

o

Ri

O'odham

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status
of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Koasati

MEXICO
110°W

Alabama

de
an

Kiliwa

Gr

Extinct
(since the 1950s)

Kiowa Apache

Southern Tiwa

O’odham

Quapaw
HuronWyandot

Arapaho
Kiowa

AcomaLaguna

Maricopa

Cahuilla

Miami-Illinois
Osage
Pawnee
Yuchi
Creek

Chemehuevi

Cocopa

Ocean

Santa Fe
Rio Grande Keresan

Yavapai

Kansa

Chiwere
Cheyenne

Picuris

Navajo

Zuni

Mohave

Los Angeles

Cherokee

Taos

Jemez

Hualapai

Luiseño
Cupeño

Pacific

Jicarilla Apache

Ute

Tewa

Tubatulabal

Tipai
Critically
endangered

Arkansa
s

Upland Yuman
Hopi

Purisimeño
Ineseño

Severely
endangered

Ute

Kings River
Yokuts

Migueleño
Obispeño

Barbareño
Island Chumash

Southern
Paiute

Mono

Valley
Antoniano Yokuts

Definitely
endangered

Potawatomi

Northern Sierra Miwok
Central Sierra Miwok

San Francisco

40°N

Denver

Southeastern Pomo
Wappo
Washo

Mono (Western)

Vulnerable

Kickapoo

Ute

Shoshoni

Co
lo
ra
do

Central
Pomo
Kashaya

Salt Lake City
Northeastern Pomo

Cheyenne

AMERICA

Yurok

0

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

200

400 km

100°W

Koasati

Map 4

Central America
Achi’ (GTM)
Akatek (2) (GTM; MEX)
Aruaco (COL)
Awakatek (2) (GTM; MEX)
Ayapanec (MEX)
Barí (COL)
Bay Islands Creole (HND)
Boruca (CRI)
Bribri (2) (CRI; PAN)
Buglé (PAN)
Cabécar (CRI)
Cacaopera (NIC)
Central Náhuatl (MEX)
Central Otomí (MEX)
Central Pame (MEX)
Central Zoque (MEX)
Ch’orti’ (2) (GTM; HND)
Chichimec (MEX)
Chimila (COL)
Chontal Tabasco (MEX)
Chorotega (CRI)
Chuj (2) (GTM; MEX)
Damana (COL)
Eastern Mazahua (MEX)
Embera (2) (COL; PAN)
Filomeno Mata Totonac
(MEX)

Garífuna (4) (BLZ; GTM; HND; NIC)

Guatuso (CRI)
Huasteca Náhuatl (MEX)
Huehuetla Tepehua (MEX)
Huichol (MEX)
Itzá (GTM)
Ixil (2) (GTM; MEX)
Ixtenco Otomí (MEX)
Jakaltek (2) (GTM; MEX)
K’iche’ (2) (GTM; MEX)
Kaqchikel (2) (GTM; MEX)
Kogui (COL)
Kuna (2) (COL; PAN)
Lacandón (MEX)
Lenca (HND; SLV)
Limonese Creole (CRI)
Lower Northwestern Otomí
(MEX)

Mam (2) (GTM; MEX)
Matagalpa (NIC)
Matlatzinca (MEX)
Mezquital Otomí (MEX)
Misantla Totonac (MEX)
Miskito (2) (HND; NIC)
Mopán (2) (BLZ; GTM)
Mosquitia Creole (NIC)
Motocintlec (MEX)
Ngäbere (2) (CRI; PAN)
Northern Pame (MEX)

Northern Totonac (MEX)
Northwestern Otomí (MEX)
Ocoyoacac Otomí (MEX)
Opon-Carare (COL)
Ozomatlán Totonac (MEX)
Palenque Creole (COL)
Panamahka (NIC)
Panamanian Creole (PAN)
Papantla Totonac (MEX)
Patla-Chicontla Totonac
(MEX)

Pech (HND)
Phurhepecha (MEX)
Pipil (SLV)
Pisaflores Tepehua (MEX)
Poqomam (GTM)
Poqomchi’ (GTM)
Q’aanjob’al (GTM)
Q’eqchi’ (2) (BLZ; GTM)
Rama (NIC)
Rama Cay Creole (NIC)
Sakapultek (GTM)
San Andres Creole (COL)
Sierra de Puebla Náhuatl
(MEX)

Sierra Otomí (MEX)
Sierra Totonac (MEX)
Sipakapense (GTM)

Southern Zoque (MEX)
Southwestern Tepehuan
(MEX)

Southwestern Tlapanec
(MEX)

Subtiaba (NIC)
Tabasco Náhuatl (MEX)
Tawahka (HND)
Teko (MEX)
Tektitek (GTM)
Teribe (2) (CRI; PAN)
Tilapa Otomí (MEX)
Tlachichilco Tepehua (MEX)
Tlahuica (MEX)
Tol (HND)
Tuahka (NIC)
Tuzantec (MEX)
Tz’utujil (GTM)
Ulwa (NIC)
Uspantek (GTM)
Waunana (PAN)
Western Mazahua (MEX)
Western Náhuatl (MEX)
Western Otomí (MEX)
Western Tlapanec (MEX)
Western Zoque (MEX)
Xinka (GTM)
Yucatec (BLZ)

12
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Central America Map 4
100°W

90°W

80°W

Gulf of Mexico
Ozomatlán
Totonac

Tlachichilco
Tepehua

HAVANA

Huichol

MEXICO

Chichimec

Pisaflores
Tepehua

Western Otomí
Western Mazahua

Eastern Mazahua

Cancùn

Mezquital
Otomí

Misantla Totonac

Phurhepecha

Matlatzinca
Central Otomí
Ocoyoacac Otomí
Tlahuica
Tilapa Otomí
Central Náhuatl

Ayapanec

K’iche'

Chontal Tabasco
Central Zoque
Yucatec
Western
Akatec
Zoque
Itzá
SSouthern
uthe Zoque
Lacandón
Chuj
Mopán
Jakaltek

Pacific

GUATEMALA

Central Mexico map

GUATEMALA
CITY Xinka

Teko

Jakaltek

Language Vitality

Motocintlec

Severely
endangered

Critically
endangered

Honduras

Mopán
Garífuna
Garífuna

Caribbean

Tawahka

Tol

Miskito

TEGUCIGALPA

Pipil

Lenca

Tuahka

Matagalpa

Garífuna

Subtiaba

Miskito

MANAGUA
Rama

Providencia

Ulwa

San Andres Creole
Mosquitia Creole
Rama Cay Creole
Limonese
Creole

Akatec
Uspantek

Kogui

Bribri
Teribe

Palenque
Creole

Guatuso

Poqomchí

Cabécar
Chorotega

Achí

Sakapulteko

Tz'utujil

Sea

Panamahka

NICARAGUA

Cacaopera

Chuj
GUATEMALA
Q’aanjob'al
Q’eqchi'
Ixil

Tektiteko Awakatek
Sipakapense
Tuzantec
K’iche'
Mam

KINGSTON

JAMAICA

Bay Islands Creole

BELMOPAN

EL SALVADOR

MEXICO

10°N

Gulf of

Garífuna
Q’eqchi'

Pech
Ch’orti'
HONDURAS
Poqomam

SAN SALVADOR

Definitely
endangered

BELIZE

Ch’orti'

Ocean

HAITI

Cayman Is.

Mam

Central Tlapanec

20°N

Ixil
Tabasco
Náhuatl

Western Tlapanec

Vulnerable

Turks Is.

Kaqchiquel
Awakatek

Sierra de Puebla Náhuatl
Ixtenco Otomí

MEXICO C.

Western Náhuatl

CUBA

Sierra Otomí
Patla-Chicontla Totonac
Filomeno Mata Totonac

Northwestern Otomí
Lower Northwestern Otomí

20°N

BAHAMAS

Huehuetla Tepehua
Northern Totonac
Sierra Totonac
Papantla Totonac

Central
Pame
Huasteca
Náhuatl

Northern
Pame

SAN JOSÉ

Kaqchiquel

COSTA RICA

Ngäbere

Ngäbere

PANAMA CITY

Buglé
Waunana

PANAMA

Embera

Kuna

COLOMBIA

Extinct
(since the 1950s)
The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Chimila

Kuna

Bribri

Teribe
Boruca

GUATEMALA
CITY

Damana

Panamanian Creole

90°W

0

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

200

400 km

80°W

Embera

Magdalena

Southwestern
Tepehuan

Opon-Carare

Map 5

Central Mexico
Acatepec Mazatec (MEX)
Ayautla Mazatec (MEX)
Central Cuicatec (MEX)
Central Popoloc (MEX)
Central Tlapanec (MEX)
Chatino of the western
lowlands (MEX)
Chatino of Zacatepec (MEX)
Chilchotla Mazatec (MEX)
Chiquihuitlán Mazatec (MEX)
Eastern Chocho (MEX)
Eastern Cuicatec (MEX)
Eastern Popoloc (MEX)
Eastern Tlapanec (MEX)
Eloxochitlán Mazatec (MEX)
Higher Reservoir Mazatec
(MEX)

Highland Chontal (MEX)
Highland Mazatec (MEX)
Huehuetlán Mazatec (MEX)
Isthmus Náhuatl (MEX)
Ixcatec (MEX)
Ixcatlán Mazatec (MEX)
Lower Mixe (MEX)
Lowland Chontal (MEX)
Lowland Mazatec (MEX)

Malinaltepec Tlapanec (MEX)
Mazatlán Mazatec (MEX)
Mixtec of San Miguel
Piedras (MEX)
Mixtec of San Pedro Tidaá

Ocopetatillo Mazatec (MEX)
Olultecan (MEX)
Puebla Mazatec (MEX)
San Dionisio del Mar Huave

(MEX)

San Francisco del Mar
Huave (MEX)
San Mateo del Mar Huave

Mixtec of Santa Cruz
Itundujia (MEX)
Mixtec of Santa Inés de
Zaragoza (MEX)
Mixtec of the central Ravine
(MEX)

Mixtec of the northeast
lowlands (MEX)
Mixtec of the PueblaOaxaca border (MEX)
Mixtec of the southwest of
Puebla (MEX)
Mixtec of Tlaltempan (MEX)
Mixtec of Villa de Tututepec
(MEX)

Mixtec of Zapotitlán (MEX)
Northern Cuicatec (MEX)
Northern Popoloc (MEX)
Northern Tlapanec (MEX)
Northwestern Tlapanec

(MEX)

(MEX)

Santa María del Mar Huave
(MEX)

Sayultec (MEX)
Sierra Popoluca (MEX)
Southern Chocho (MEX)
Southern Tlapanec (MEX)
Soyaltepec Mazatec (MEX)
Tecóatl Mazatec (MEX)
Texistepecan (MEX)
Valle Nacional Chinantec
(MEX)

Western Chocho (MEX)
Western Mazatec (MEX)
Western Popoloc (MEX)
Zapotec of Asunción
Tlacolulita (MEX)
Zapotec of Mixtepe (MEX)

Zapotec of Petapa (MEX)
Zapotec of San Antonino el
Alto (MEX)
Zapotec of San Bartolo
Yautepec (MEX)
Zapotec of San Felipe
Tejalapan (MEX)
Zapotec of the Southern
mountains, eastern
lowlands (MEX)
Zapotec of the Southern
mountains, northeast (MEX)
Zapotec of the Southern
mountains, northwest
lowlands (MEX)
Zapotec of the Valleys north
(MEX)

Zapotec of the Valleys,
central (MEX)
Zapotec of the Valleys,
middle northwest (MEX)
Zapotec of the Valleys, west
(MEX)

Zapotec of Zimatlán de
Álvarez (MEX)

(MEX)

14
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Central Mexico Map 5
98°W

Orizaba

Mixtec of Tlaltempan

Western Popoloc

Gulf of Mexico

Highland Mazatec

Puebla Mazatec

Central Popoloc

94°W

Acatepec Mazatec

Ocopetatillo Mazatec

Northern Popoloc

Mixtec of the southwest of Puebla

96°W

Eloxochitlán
Mazatec

Tehuacan
Eastern Popoloc

Mixtec of Zapotitlán

Chilchotla Mazatec
Sierra Popoluca

Soyaltepec Mazatec
Higher
Reservoir
Mazatec

Huehuetlán Mazatec
Tecóatl Mazatec
Western Mazatec

Mixtec of the Puebla-Oaxaca border

18°N

Ixcatec

Northern Tlapanec

Southern Chocho

Eastern Chocho

Malinaltepec
Tlapanec

18°N

Texistepecan

Sayultec

Ayautla Mazatec
Chiquihuitlán Mazatec
Eastern Cuicatec
Northern Cuicatec

Mixtec of the northeast lowlands

MEXICO

Mixtec of San Pedro Tidaá
Central
Tlapanec

Valle Nacional Chinantec

Central Cuicatec

Coatzacoalcos

Olultecan

Lowland Mazatec

Mixtec of the
central Ravine

Western Chocho

Northwestern Tlapanec

Isthmus Náhuatl

Ixcatlán Mazatec

Mazatlán Mazatec
Eastern Tlapanec

Miguel Aleman lake

Mixtec of Santa Inés de Zaragoza
Zapotec of the Valleys north

Zapotec of San Felipe Tejalapan

Oaxaca

Mixtec of San Miguel Piedras

Zapotec of the Valleys, middle northwest
Lower Mixe

Southern Tlapanec
Mixtec of Santa
Cruz Itundujia

Zapotec of
San Antonino
el Alto

Zapotec of
Zimatlán de
Álvarez

Zapotec of the
Valleys, central

Zapotec of Petapa

Zapotec of the Southern
mountains,
northwest lowlands

16°N

Language Vitality

Vulnerable

Zapotec of the
Valleys, west

Definitely
endangered

Severely
endangered

Zapotec of San Bartolo Yautepec

Mixtec of Villa
de Tututepec

Chatino of
Zacatepec

San Dionisio del
Mar Huave

Zapotec of the
Southern mountains,
northeast

Chatino of the
western lowlands

Zapotec of
Mixtepe

Highland
Chontal

Zapotec of the
Southern mountains,
eastern lowlands

Zapotec of
Asunción
Tlacolulita

San Mateo del
Mar Huave

San Francisco
del Mar Huave
Santa María

Salina Cruz del Mar Huave

16°N

Lowland Chontal

Critically
endangered

Extinct
(since the 1950s)
The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Pacific

Ocean
0

96°W

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

50

100 km

94°W

Map 6

Northern South America
A’ingae / Cofan (2) (COL; ECU)
Achagua (COL)
Achuar (ECU; PER)
Akawaio (2) (BRA; GUY; VEN)
Akuriyo (SUR)
Akwáwa (BRA)
Amanayé (BRA)
Anambé (BRA)
Andoa (2) (ECU; PER)
Andoke (COL)
Añu (VEN)
Apalai (BRA)
Apurinã (BRA)
Arabela (PER)
Arapáso (BRA)
Arara do Pará (BRA)
Araweté (BRA)
Aruaco (COL)
Asurini do Xingu (BRA)
Awa Cuaiquer (COL)
Awajun (PER)
Awapit (ECU)
Baniva (VEN)
Baníwa do Içana (BRA; COL;
VEN)

16

Bara (2) (BRA; COL)
Barasana (2) (BRA; COL)
Baré (2) (BRA; VEN)
Barí (COL)
Berbice Dutch Creole (GUY)
Bora (COL; PER)
Cabiyarí (COL)
Cacua (COL)
Camsá (COL)
Candoshi (PER)

Carabayo (COL)
Carapana (2) (BRA; COL)
Carijona (COL)
Cha’palaa (ECU)
Chamicuro (PER)
Chayahuita (PER)
Chimila (COL)
Cocama-Cocamilla (2) (BRA;
PER)

Cubeo (2) (BRA; COL)
Cuiba (COL; VEN)
Damana (COL)
Dâw (BRA)
Desano (2) (BRA; COL)
Embera (2) (COL; PAN)
Émérillon (GUF)
Galibi Marworno (BRA)
Gavião do Pará (BRA)
Guajiro (COL; VEN)
Guambiano (COL)
Guayabero (COL)
Hixkaryána (BRA)
Hodi (VEN)
Huitoto (2) (BRA; COL; PER)
Hupda (2) (BRA; COL)
Inga (COL)
Iquito (PER)
Island Carib (DMA)
Jebero (PER)
Jitnu (COL)
Kaixána (BRA)
Kari’ña (4) (BRA; GUF; GUY; SUR;
VEN)

Karipuna do Amapá (BRA)
Katukína-Kanamarí (BRA)

Katxuyana-Xikuyána (BRA)
Kogui (COL)
Koreguaje (COL)
Korúbo (BRA)
Kulina Páno (BRA)
Kuna (2) (COL; PAN)
Kurripako (2) (BRA; COL; VEN)
Kuruáya (BRA)
Lokono (2) (GUF; GUY; SUR; VEN)
Macaguaje (COL)
Macuna (2) (BRA; COL)
Macushi (2) (BRA; GUY)
Mako (VEN)
Máku (BRA)
Mawayana (2) (BRA; GUY; SUR)
Mawé (BRA)
Mayoruna (2) (BRA; PER)
Miraña (2) (BRA; COL)
Mirití Tapuia (BRA)
Muinane (COL)
Munichi (PER)
Múra (BRA)
Nadëb (BRA)
Nheengatu / Yeral (2) (BRA;
VEN)

Panare (VEN)
Patamona (2) (BRA; GUY)
Pemon (2) (BRA; GUY; VEN)
Pémono (VEN)
Piapoko (COL; VEN)
Piaroa (2) (COL; VEN)
Pijao (COL)
Piratapuya (2) (BRA; COL)
Pisamira (COL)
Puinave (COL; VEN)
Pume (VEN)
Quechua of Peruvian
Amazonia (PER)
Quichua (7) (ECU)
Resígaro (PER)
Sáliba (COL; VEN)
San Andres Creole (COL)
Sanema (2) (BRA; VEN)
Sapé (VEN)
Shiwiar (ECU)
Shuar chicham (ECU)
Sia Pedee (ECU)
Sikïiyana (SUR)
Sikuani (COL; VEN)
Siona / Secoya (3) (COL; ECU;

Ninam (2) (BRA; VEN)
Nonuya (COL)
Nukak (COL)
Ocaina (2) (COL; PER)
Omagua (2) (BRA; PER)
Opon-Carare (COL)
Orejón (PER)
Páez (COL)
Palenque Creole (COL)
Palikur (2) (BRA; GUF)

Siriano (2) (BRA; COL)
Tanimuca-Letuama (COL)
Tariana (2) (BRA; COL)
Taruma (GUY)
Tatuyo (COL)
Taushiro (PER)
Tetete (ECU)
Ticuna (BRA; COL; PER)
Tinigua (COL)

PER)

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Totoró (COL)
Trio (2) (BRA; SUR)
Tsafiki (ECU)
Tucano (2) (BRA; COL)
Tunebo (COL; VEN)
Tuyuca (2) (BRA; COL)
Urarina (PER)
Uruak (VEN)
Vacacocha (PER)
Waimirí-Atroarí (BRA)
Waiwai (3) (BRA; GUY; SUR)
Wajãpi (BRA)
Wampis (PER)
Wanai (VEN)
Wanano / Kotiria (2) (BRA; COL)
Waotededo (ECU)
Wapishana (2) (BRA; GUY)
Warao (GUY; VEN)
Warekena (2) (BRA; VEN)
Waunana (2) (COL; PAN)
Wayana (2) (BRA; SUR)
Xipáya (BRA)
Yagua (PER)
Yameo (PER)
Yanomám (BRA)
Yanomami (2) (BRA; VEN)
Yawarana (VEN)
Yecuana (2) (BRA; VEN)
Yucuna (COL)
Yuhup (2) (BRA; COL)
Yukpa (VEN)
Yurutí (2) (BRA; COL)
Zaparo (ECU; PER)
Zo’é (BRA)

Northern South America Map 6
The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

70°W

Caribbean

Language Vitality

Vulnerable

60°W
Island Carib

Sea

Definitely
Severely
Critically
Extinct
endangered endangered endangered (since the 1950s)

Kogui

Martinique
ST. VINCENT AND
THE GRENADINES

Netherlands
Antilles

PANAMA
CITY

Yukpa

Embera

BOGOTA

Guayabero

Awapit
Sia Pedee

Yurutí
Tinigua

Camsá

Nukak

Cubeo

Sanema

Piaroa

Sikuani

Pijao

Lokono

Yanomám
Yawarana Pémono
Puinave
Yecuana

Piaroa

Achagua

Wanano/
Kotiria

Piapoko
Baniva

Mako
Yanomami
Warekena

Kurripako

Sapé
Patamona

Ninam
Uruak
Yanomám

Lokono

Akawaio Berbice Dutch
Creole
Pemon

Pemon

Kari'ña

PARAMARIBO

Patamona

Akawaio
Máku
Macushi

Macushi

Taruma
Wapishana

Waiwai

French
Palikur
Guiana

SURINAME

Cayenne
Palikur
Kari'ña

Akuriyo Oayana Galibi Marworno

GUYANA

Ninam
Sanema
Yecuana

Pisamira
Carapana

Inga

Ocean

GEORGETOWN

Hodi

Tunebo Jitnu Cuiba

Waunana

Páez
Guambiano

Kari'ña

Panare

Sáliba

Awa Cuaiquer

Atlantic

Pume

Medellin Opon-Carare

Ocean

10°N

North

Wanai

COLOMBIA

BRAZIL

Yurutí

Kari'ña

Waunana

Nheengatu/Yeral

Piratapuya
Tuyuca
Mirití Tapuia Bara
Baré
Tucano
Dâw
Bara
Desano

Warao

VENEZUELA

VEN.

TRINIDAD AND
TOBAGO

CARACAS

Barí

Embera

Warekena

Macuna

Añu

Chimila
Aruaco

PANAMA

Totoró

Barasana

GRENADA

Damana

Palenque Creole

Baré

Cubeo
Macuna
Tariana

Piratapuya Cacua
Barasana
Hupda
Tucano
Tuyuca
Tariana Kurripako Wanano/
Kotiria
Hupda
Tatuyo
Siriano

BARBADOS

PORT OF SPAIN

Kuna

Pacific

COLOMBIA

ST. LUCIA

Guajiro

Kuna

Baníwa do
Içana

DOMINICA

Aruba

10°N

50°W

Guadeloupe

Karipuna do Amapá

Waiwai
Sikïiyana
Trio

Wayana

Émérillon

Mawayana
Katxuyana-Xikuyána Trio

Koreguaje

Siriano
A'ingae/ Tetete Siona/
Cha'palaa
Desano
Macaguaje
Cofan
Secoya
Tsafiki
Cabiyarí
Quichua
Arapáso
ECUADOR
Tanimuca-Letuama
Quichua Siona/
QUITO
Yuhup
Secoya
Quichua
Waotededo
Andoke
Baré
Nonuya
Muinane
Arabela
Quichua
Andoa
Quichua
Nheengatu/Yeral
Yucuna
Cocama-Cocamilla
Carijona
Zaparo
Ocaina
Carabayo
Orejón Bora
Miraña
Shiwiar
Miraña
Quichua
Vacacocha
Kaixána Nadëb
Carapana
Quechua Ocaina
Huitoto
Resígaro
of
Peruvian
Andoa
Shuar
Amazonia
Achuar
chicham
Huitoto
Taushiro
Mayoruna
Yagua
PERU
Omagua
Wampis
Quichua
Ticuna
Iquito
Candoshi
Omagua
Urarina
Yameo
Awajun
Jebero
Cocama-Cocamilla Kulina Páno
Katukína-Kanamarí
Korúbo
Chayahuita
Mayoruna
Apurinã
Chamicuro
80°W
70°W
Munichi

Wayana
Zo'é

Apalai

Wajãpi

0°

Waiwai
Hixkaryána
Mawayana
Waimirí-Atroarí

BRAZIL

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Belém

Manaus

Arara do Pará

Múra
Mawé

Xipáya

Anambé

Asurini do Xingu
Amanayé

Kuruáya
Gavião do Pará

60°W

0

250

500 km

Akwáwa Araweté

50°W

Map 7

Western South America
Aikana (BRA)
Ajuru (BRA)
Akuntsu (BRA)
Amahuaca (PER)
Apiaká (BRA)
Apolista (BOL)
Apurinã (BRA)
Araona (BOL)
Arára Shawãdáwa (BRA)
Arikapu (BRA)
Aruá (BRA)
Ashaninka (2) (BRA; PER)
Awajun (PER)
Aymara (BOL; CHL; PER)
Ayoreo (BOL)
Banawá Yafi (BRA)
Baure (BOL)
Callahuaya (BOL)
Canichana (BOL)
Capanahua (PER)
Caquinte Campa (PER)
Cashibo-Cacataibo (PER)
Cashinahua (2) (BRA; PER)
Cavineña (BOL)
Cayuvava (BOL)
Chácobo (BOL)
Chamicuro (PER)
Chayahuita (PER)
Chimané (BOL)
Chipaya (BOL)

Chiquitano (2) (BOL; BRA)
Cholon (PER)
Cinta Larga (BRA)
Cocama-Cocamilla (PER)
Culina (2) (BRA; PER)
Culle (PER)
Dení (BRA)
Diahói (BRA)
Djeoromitxi (BRA)
Enawenê-Nawê (BRA)
Ese eja (BOL; PER)
Gavião de Rondônia (BRA)
Guaraní Boliviano (ARG; BOL)
Guarasu (BRA)
Guarayu (BOL)
Guató (BRA)
Harakmbut (PER)
Iñapari (PER)
Iranxe (BRA)
Itonama (BOL)
Jamamadí (BRA)
Jaqaru (PER)
Jarawára (BRA)
Jebero (PER)
Jorá (BOL)
Juma (BRA)
Kanoê (BRA)
Karipuna (BRA)
Karitiana (BRA)
Karo (BRA)

Katawixi (BRA)
Katukina do Acre (BRA)
Katukína-Kanamarí (BRA)
Kaxarari (BRA)
Korúbo (BRA)
Kujubim (BRA)
Kulina Páno (BRA)
Kwazá (BRA)
Leco (BOL)
Machiguenga (PER)
Machineri (2) (BOL; BRA)
Makurap (BRA)
Marúbo (BRA)
Matís (BRA)
Mayoruna (PER)
Mochica (PER)
Mojo (BOL)
Moré (BOL)
Mosetén (BOL)
Movima (BOL)
Mundurukú (BRA)
Munichi (PER)
Myky (BRA)
Nambiquara do Norte (BRA)
Nambiquara do Sul (BRA)
Nanti (PER)
Nomatsiguenga (PER)
Nukiní (BRA)
Omagua (PER)
Oro Win (BRA)

Pacahuara (BOL)
Paiter (BRA)
Panobo (PER)
Pareci (BRA)
Parintintin (BRA)
Paumarí (BRA)
Paunaca (BOL)
Pirahã (BRA)
Poyanawa (BRA)
Puruborá (BRA)
Quechua of Ancash and
Huánuco (PER)
Quechua of Ayacucho (PER)
Quechua of Cajamarca (PER)
Quechua of Cajatambo,
Pasco and northern Junín
(PER)

Quechua of Chachapoyas
(PER)

Quechua of Cuzco (PER)
Quechua of Northern
Bolivia (BOL)
Quechua of Pacaraos (PER)
Quechua of San Martín (PER)
Quechua of Southern
Bolivia (BOL)
Quechua of Yauyos (PER)
Reyesano (BOL)
Rikbaktsa (BRA)
Sabanê (BRA)

18
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Sakurabiat (BRA)
Salamãy (BRA)
Shanenawa (BRA)
Sharanahua (PER)
Shipibo-Conibo (PER)
Sirionó (BOL)
Suruahá (BRA)
Tacana (BOL)
Tenharim (BRA)
Ticuna (BRA; COL; PER)
Torá (BRA)
Tupari (BRA)
Umutina (BRA)
Urarina (PER)
Uru (BOL)
Uru-eu-au-au (BRA)
Urupá (BRA)
Wanka Quechua (PER)
Wari (BRA)
Yameo (PER)
Yaminahua (2) (BOL; BRA; PER)
Yanesha (PER)
Yawanawá (BRA)
Yine (PER)
Yuki (BOL)
Yuracaré (BOL)
Zoró (BRA)

Western South America Map 7

Chayahuita

Trujillo

250

Apurinã

Korúbo

M

Matís

Paumarí

Marúbo

Cholon

Shanenawa

Pucallpa

s
uru

Diahói
Katawixi

Yanesha
Ashaninka

Quechua of
Pacaraos

Nomatsiguenga

Karitiana

Chácobo

Machiguenga

Wanka
Quechua

Iñapari

Harakmbut

Language Vitality

Critically
endangered

Makurap

Quechua of Cuzco

Leco

Mosetén

Chimané

Guarasu

Extinct
(since the 1950s)
The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Iranxe

Nambiquara
do Sul

Pareci

Sirionó

Mojo

Trinidad

Umutina

Aymara

Yuki
Chiquitano

Yuracaré

Paunaca

BOLIVIA

Kujubim
Ajuru
Aruá
Djeoromitxi

Chiquitano
Guató

Quechua of Southern Bolivia

Moré

BOLIVIA

Sabanê

Guarayu

LA PAZ

BRAZIL

Apiaká
Myky

Jorá
Canichana
Reyesano

Quechua of Northern Bolivia

Oro Win
Wari

Kanoê

Itonama

Lake Titicaca

Rikbaksta

Aikana
Akuntsu

Movima

Ica

Ocean

Baure

Cayuvava

Apolista

Pacific

Sakurabiat

Tacana

Uru
Severely
endangered

Paiter
Nambiquara do Norte
Enawenê-Nawê
Kwazá
Tupari

Ese eja

Callahuaya

Definitely
endangered

Puruborá

Cavineña

Araona

10°S

Urupá

Pacahuara

Nanti

Quechua of
Quechua of
Yauyos
Ayacucho

Vulnerable

Uru-eu-au-au

Machineri

Jaqaru

South

Gavião de Rondônia
Karo
Zoró
Cinta Larga

Karipuna

Yaminahua
Yine

LIMA

Yaminahua
Yawanawá

Caquinte
Campa

BRAZIL

Porto Velho

Kaxarari
Cashinahua
Sharanahua
Amahuaca

Mundurukú

Tenharim

Salamãy

Machineri
Quechua of Cajatambo,
Pasco and
northern Junín

Pirahã

Juma

Jamamadí

Cashinahua
Arára
Shawãdáwa
Culina
Ashaninka

10°S

20°S

Torá

P

CashiboCacataibo

Quechua of Ancash and Huánuco

Parintintin

Jarawára

Suruahá
Culina

Poyanawa

PERU
Culle

r
ve
Ri

Dení

Katukina do Acre

ShipiboConibo

ad

a
eir

Banawá Yafi

Nukiní

Panobo

500 km

Katukína-Kanamarí

li
aya
Uc
Capanahua

Quechua of
San Martín
Quechua of
Cajamarca

Kulina Páno
Mayoruna

Munichi

Mochica

CocamaCocamilla

Chamicuro

Quechua of Chachapoyas

60°W
0

Yameo

Ta
pa
jó
s

Jebero

70°W

Omagua

Urarina

Ayoreo

Arikapu
Chipaya

Sucre

CHILE
Guaraní Boliviano

70°W

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

PARAGUAY
60°W

ag
ua
y

Awajun

Pa
r

ECUADOR

Map 8

Eastern South America
Akwáwa (BRA)
Amanayé (BRA)
Anambé (BRA)
Apiaká (BRA)
Apinajé (BRA)
Arara do Pará (BRA)
Araweté (BRA)
Asurini do Xingu (BRA)
Aurê-Aurá (BRA)
Ava-Canoeiro (BRA)
Aweti (BRA)
Bakairi (BRA)
Bororo (BRA)
Chiquitano (BRA)
Gavião do Pará (BRA)
Guajá (BRA)
Guajajara (BRA)
Guató (BRA)
Ikpeng (BRA)
Iranxe (BRA)
Javaé (BRA)

Ka’apór (BRA)
Kalapalo (BRA)
Kamaiurá (BRA)
Kanela Apaniekra (BRA)
Kanela Rankokamekra (BRA)
Karajá (BRA)
Kayabi (BRA)
Kisêdjê (BRA)
Krahô (BRA)
Krenak (BRA)
Krenjê (BRA)
Krikati (BRA)
Kuikuro (BRA)
Kuruáya (BRA)
Matipu (BRA)
Mawé (BRA)
Maxakali (BRA)
Mebengokre (BRA)
Mehináku (BRA)
Mundurukú (BRA)
Nahukwa (BRA)

Panará (BRA)
Pareci (BRA)
Pukobyê (BRA)
Rikbaktsa (BRA)
Tapayuna (BRA)
Tapirapé (BRA)
Tembé (BRA)
Terena (BRA)
Trumai (BRA)
Umutina (BRA)
Wauja (BRA)
Xakriabá (BRA)
Xambioá (BRA)
Xavante (BRA)
Xerente (BRA)
Xipáya (BRA)
Yatê (BRA)
Yawalapiti (BRA)
Yudja (BRA)

20
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Eastern South America Map 8
Krenjê

Ta
pa
jós

Mawé

Aurê-Aurá

Xipáya

Gavião do Pará

Fortaleza

Guajajara

Teresina

Pukobyê

Araweté
Akwáwa

Kuruáya

Vulnerable

Guajá

Amanayé
Asurini do
Xingu

Sao Luis

Ka'apór

Tembé

Anambé
Arara do Pará

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

40°W

Belem

Krikati
Apinajé
Kanela Apaniekra

Xambioá

Mebengokre

Natal
Kanela Rankokamekra

BRAZIL

Severely
endangered

Extinct
(since the 1950s)

Xi

Panará

Definitely
endangered

Critically
endangered

Yatê

ng

Mundurukú

Language Vitality

50°W

uR

Krahô

Tapayuna

r
ive
Xerente

Yudja
Kayabi

10°S

Tapirapé

Rikbaktsa

Apiaká

Ikpeng

Palmas

Trumai

Kamaiurá

Karajá

Wauja

Javaé

Aweti

Kalapalo
Matipu

Mehináku

Iranxe

10°S

Kisêdjê
Nahukwa

South

Yawalapiti

Atlantic

Kuikuro

Xavante

Ava-Canoeiro
Xakriabá

Umutina

BRASÍLIA

Bororo

Cuiaba

Chiquitano
Guató

y
ua
ag
r
Pa

Ocean

San
Fra
ncis
co

Pareci

gua
ia

Riv
er

Salvador

Ara

Bakairi

Goiania

Maxakali

r
ve
Ri

BOLIVIA
Krenak

PARAGUAY

0

Belo Horizonte

Terena

50°W

500 km

20°S
40°W

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

250

Map 9

Southern South America
Aché (PRY)
Atacameño (ARG; BOL; CHL)
Ava-Guaraní (ARG)
Chamacoco (BRA; PRY)
Chaná (ARG)
Chorote Iyojwa’ja (ARG; PRY)
Guaná (PRY)
Guaraní Boliviano (ARG; BOL)
Gününa Küne (ARG)
Huilliche (CHL)
Kadiwéu (BRA)
Kaingang (BRA)
Kaiowá Guarani (BRA)
Kinikinau (BRA)

Lengua (PRY)
Maká (PRY)
Manjui (ARG; BOL; PRY)
Mapuche (2) (ARG; CHL)
Mbya Guarani (3) (ARG; BRA; PRY;
URY)

Mocoví (ARG)
Ñandeva Guarani (BRA)
Nivaclé (PRY)
Ofayé (BRA)
Ona (ARG)
Pilagá (ARG)
Qawasqar (CHL)

Quechua of Santiago del
Estero (ARG)
Sanapaná (PRY)
Tapieté (ARG; BOL; PRY)
Tehuelche (ARG)
Terena (BRA)
Toba (ARG)
Toba-Maskoy (PRY)
Vilela (ARG)
Wichi (ARG; BOL)
Xetá (BRA)
Xokleng (BRA)
Yahgan (CHL)

22
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Southern South America Map 9
80°W

70°W

Wichi

Guaraní Boliviano

BOLIVIA Tapieté

Toba-Maskoy
Sanapaná

Guaná
Kinikinau

Nivaclé

Atacameño

Ava-Guaraní

Kadiwéu

PARAGUAY

Manjui

Pilagá
Toba

Maká

r
Pa

Vulnerable
Rio de Janeiro

BRAZIL
Aché

São Paulo

Xetá

Xokleng

Kaingang

Mbya Guarani

20°S

a
an

Mbya Guarani

Para
gua
y

Mocoví

40°W

Ofayé

ASUNCIÓN

Vilela
Quechua of
Santiago del Estero

Ñandeva
Guarani

Lengua
Chamacoco

Chorote Iyojwa'ja

50°W

Terena
Kaiowá
Guarani

Porto Alegre

Language Vitality

20°S

Definitely
endangered

Severely
endangered

Critically
endangered

Mbya Guarani

30°S

30°S

South

Chaná

Valparaíso

Pacific

ARGENTINA

Extinct
(since the 1950s)

URUGUAY

SANTIAGO
BUENOS AIRES
MONTEVIDEO

CHILE

Ocean

Río de
la Plata

Mapuche
Huilliche

40°S

Bahía Blanca
Mapuche

40°S

South
Gününa Küne

Atlantic
Ocean

Qawasqar
Tehuelche

50°S

50°S

Falkland Islands
Rio Gallegos

Yahgan

South Georgia
and
the South Sandwich Is.

Stanley

Strait of Magellan
Ona

Ushuaia

80°W

0

250

500 km

70°W

60°W

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

50°W

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Map 10 Europe
Alderney French (GBR)
Alemannic (AUT; CHE; DEU; FRA;
ITA; LIE)

Algherese Catalan (ITA)
Alpine Provençal (FRA; ITA)
Aragonese (ESP)
Arbanasi (HRV)
Arbëresh (ITA)
Aromanian (ALB; BGR; GRC; MKD;
SRB)

Arvanitika (GRC)
Asturian-Leonese (ESP; PRT)
Auvergnat (FRA)
Banat Bulgarian (ROU; SRB)
Basque (ESP; FRA)
Bavarian (AUT; CHE; CZE; DEU; HUN;
ITA)

Belarusian (BRB; LTU; LVA; POL; RUS;
UKR)

Breton (FRA)
Burgenland Croatian (AUT; HUN;
SVK)

Burgundian (FRA)
Campidanese (ITA)
Cappadocian Greek (GRC)
Champenois (BEL; FRA)
Chuvash (RUS)
Cimbrian (ITA)
Corfiot Italkian (GRC)
Cornish* (GBR)
Corsican (FRA; ITA)
Crimean Tatar (2) (BGR; ROU;
UKR)

24

Crimean Turkish (UKR)
Csángó Hungarian (ROU)
Dalecarlian (SWE)

Dalmatian (HRV)
East Franconian (CZE; DEU)
Eastern Mari (RUS)
Eastern Slovak (SVK; UKR)
Emilian-Romagnol (ITA; SMR)
Erzya (RUS)
Faetar (ITA)
Faroese (FRO)
Franc-Comtois (CHE; FRA)
Francoprovençal (CHE; FRA; ITA)
Friulian (ITA)
Gagauz (4) (BGR; GRC; MDA; MKD;

Ladin (ITA)
Languedocian (FRA)
Latgalian (LVA; RUS)
Ligurian (FRA; ITA; MCO)
Limburgian-Ripuarian (BEL;
DEU; NLD)

Limousin (FRA)
Livonian* (LVA)
Logudorese (ITA)
Lombard (CHE; ITA)
Lorrain (BEL; FRA)
Low Saxon (DEU; DNK; NLD; POL;

ROU; TUR; UKR)

RUS)

Gallo (FRA)
Gallo-Sicilian (ITA)
Gallurese (ITA)
Gardiol (ITA)
Gascon (ESP; FRA)
Ghomara (MAR)
Gottscheerish (SVN)
Griko (2) (ITA)
Guernsey French (GBR)
Gutnish (SWE)
Ingrian (RUS)
Irish (GBR; IRL)
Istriot (HRV)
Istro-Romanian (HRV)
Jersey French (GBR)
Judezmo (ALB; BGR; BIH; DZA; GRC;

Lude (RUS)
Manx* (GBR)
Mariupolitan Greek (UKR)
Megleno-Romanian (GRC;

HRV; MAR; MKD; ROU; SRB; TUR)

Karagash (RUS)
Karaim (3) (LTU; UKR)
Karelian (4) (FIN; RUS)
Kashubian (POL)
Komi (RUS)

MKD)

Mòcheno (ITA)
Moksha (RUS)
Molise Croatian (ITA)
Moselle Franconian (BEL; DEU;
FRA; LUX)

Nogay (2) (ROU; UKR)
Norman (FRA)
North Frisian (DEU)
Olonetsian (FIN; RUS)
Picard (BEL; FRA)
Piedmontese (ITA)
Plautdietsch (UKR)
Poitevin-Saintongeais (FRA)
Polesian (BRB; POL; UKR)
Provençal (FRA)
Resian (ITA)
Rhenish Franconian (DEU; FRA)

Romani (ALB; AUT; BGR; BIH; BRB; CHE;
CZE; DEU; EST; FIN; FRA; GBR; GRC; HRV;
HUN; ITA; LTU; LVA; MKD; MNE; NLD; POL;
ROU; RUS; SRB; SVK; SVN; TUR; UKR)

Romansh (CHE)
Rusyn (HUN; POL; ROU; SVK; UKR)
Sanhaja of Srair (MAR)
Sassarese (ITA)
Saterlandic (DEU)
Scanian (DNK; SWE)
Scots (GBR)
Scottish Gaelic (GBR)
Sened (TUN)
Sicilian (ITA)
Slovincian (POL)
Sorbian (DEU)
South Italian (ITA)
South Jutish (DEU; DNK)
South Saami (NOR; SWE)
Tacenwit (DZA)
Tamazight (2) (DZA; TUN)
Tayurayt (DZA)
Töitschu (ITA)
Torlak (ALB; BGR; MKD; ROU; SRB)
Transylvanian Saxon (ROU)
Tsakonian (GRC)
Ubykh (TUR)
Urum (GEO; RUS; UKR)
Venetan (HRV; ITA; SVN)
Veps (RUS)
Vilamovian (POL)
Vojvodina Rusyn (HRV; SRB)
Võro-Seto (EST; RUS)
Vote (RUS)
Walloon (BEL; FRA; LUX)

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Welsh (GBR)
West Flemish (BEL; FRA; NLD)
West Frisian (NLD)
Western Armenian (TUR)
Western Mari (RUS)
Yiddish (AUT; BEL; BRB; CHE; CZE; DEU;
DNK; EST; FIN; FRA; GBR; HUN; ITA; LTU;
LUX; LVA; MDA; NLD; NOR; POL; ROU; RUS;
SVK; SWE; UKR)

Yurt Tatar (RUS)
Zenatiya (DZA)

Europe Map 10
10°W

Language Vitality

20°E

South Saami

30°E

50°E

Karelian

Vulnerable

Faroe Is.

Definitely
Severely
Critically
Extinct
endangered endangered endangered (since the 1950s)

FINLAND

Dalecarlian

* Revitalized
Olonetsian

NORWAY

60°N

Vote

SWEDEN

Baltic
Sea

Stockholm

Scottish Gaelic

Karelian

Tallinn

ESTONIA
Võro-Seto

Gutnish
Scots

South Jutish
North Frisian

Dublin

Amst.

Welsh

Brux.

Alderney
French
Guernsey French
Jersey French
Breton

Atlantic

Picard

2

Se
ine

PoitevinSaintongeais

Champenois Lorrain

FRANCE

Rhenish
Franconian
Bavarian

Francoprovençal
Limousin
Languedocian

4

Aragonese

SPAIN

Tayurayt

MOROCCO

Sanhaja
of Srair

ALGERIA

0°E

Zenatiya

Tunis

Sened

TUNISIA

10°E

Torlak

8

Transylvanian
Saxon

ROMANIA

Urum

Mariupolitan
Greek

Gagauz

Yurt Tatar

Crimean Tatar

Karaim

Caucasus map

Crimean Turkish

Crimean Tatar

Black
Sea

Gagauz

Tbilisi

ARMENIA AZERBAIJAN
Yerevan

Ankara

Ubykh

Middle East map

Cappadocian
Greek

Tsakonian

SYRIAN ARAB
REPUBLIC

Cypriot Arabic

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

40°N

Baku

TURKEY

Athens

20°E

Caspian
Sea

GEORGIA

Judezmo
Western Armenian

Cappadocian
Greek

MALTA

Gottscheerish

Karagash

Nogay

BULGARIA
Sofia

ITALY

50°N

CROATIA

Nogay

Bucharest
Danube

Griko
Aromanian MeglenoCorfiot GREECE Romanian
Italkian Arvanitika

Sicily

Istro-Romanian
Dalmatian

Plautdietsch

Chisinau

Tirana Skopje

Griko

Sicilian
Tamazight

7

ALBANIA

Gardiol
GalloSicilian

Tacenwit
Alger

Tamazight
Ghomara

Arbëresh

Logudorese

Mediterranean Sea

SERBIA

Sarajevo

Molise
Croatian
Faetar
South Italian

Banat
Bulgarian

Belgrade

REP. of
MOLDOVA

Csángó
Romani Hungarian

Zagreb

6

Rome

Campidanese
Lisbon

HUNGARY

Arbanasi

ITALY

Gallurese

Algherese
Catalan

Madrid

Budapest

Rusyn

Piedmontese
Corsican
Sassarese

Rusyn

AUSTRIA

SLOVENIA
Friulian
Ljub.
Mòcheno
Cimbrian
Venetan
Istriot
Dn
ep
r

SLOVAKIA

Resian

Ladin

Kiev

UKRAINE

Bratislava

CROATIA Vojvodina

Ligurian
EmilianRomagnol

Provençal

PORTUGAL

40°N

Ljub. 5

Lombard

Gascon
AsturianLeonese

Burgenland
Croatian
AUSTRIA

Romansh

Bern

Töitschu
Alpine
Provençal

Auvergnat

Eastern
Slovak

CZECH REP.
Vienna

BELARUS

Karaim

Vilamovian

Prague

Alemannic

Burgundian
Franc-Comtois

Basque

East
Franconian

in

Paris

Yiddish

Erzya

Moksha

FEDERATION

Polesian

Warshaw

Sorbian

GERMANY

Moselle
Franconian

1

Norman

Gallo

Ocean

LimburgianRipuarian

Walloon

Cornish*

50°N

3

West Flemish

London

Minsk

POLAND

Berlin

RUSSIAN

Belarusian

Vilnius

Eastern
Mari

Chuvash

Moscow

Kashubian
Low
Saxon

500 km

Western Mari

Latgalian

Karaim

R. F.

Rhe

IRELAND

Riga

LITHUANIA

Slovincian

Copenhagen

Saterlandic

West
Frisian

Manx*

LATVIA

Scanian

DENMARK

0

Karelian

Karelian

Livonian*

UNITED KINGDOM OF
GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND

Irish

Veps

Ingrian

Helsinki

Oslo

North
Sea

1 - BELGIUM
Komi
2 - LUXEMBOURG
3 - NETHERLANDS
4 - SWITZERLAND
5 - SLOVENIA
6 - BOSNIA AND
60°N
HERZEGOVINA
7 - MONTENEGRO
8 - FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA

Lude

Volg
a

Faroese

10°W

40°E

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

30°E

CYPRUS

Nicosia

40°E

IRAN
IRAQ

Tehran

50°E

Map 11 Caucasus
Abaza (RUS; TUR)
Abkhaz (GEO; RUS; TUR)
Adyge (IRQ; ISR; JOR; MKD; RUS; SYR;
TUR)

Agul (RUS)
Akhvakh (RUS)
Alabugat Tatar (RUS)
Andi (RUS)
Archi (RUS)
Avar (RUS)
Bagvalal (RUS)
Bats (GEO)
Bezhta (RUS)
Bohtan Neo-Aramaic (GEO;
RUS)

Botlikh (RUS)
Budukh (AZE)
Chamalal (RUS)

Chechen (RUS)
Dargwa (RUS)
Godoberi (RUS)
Hinukh (RUS)
Homshetsma (2) (GEO; RUS; TUR)
Hunzib (RUS)
Ingush (RUS)
Inkhokvari (RUS)
Juhur (AZE; RUS)
Kabard-Cherkes (RUS; TUR)
Kalmyk (RUS)
Karachay-Balkar (RUS)
Karata (RUS)
Khinalug (AZE)
Khvarshi (RUS)
Kryz (AZE)
Kumyk (RUS)
Lak (RUS)

Laz (GEO; TUR)
Lezgian (AZE; RUS)
Mingrelian (GEO)
Nogay (RUS)
Ossete (GEO; RUS)
Pontic Greek (ARM; GEO; GRC; RUS;
TUR; UKR)

Rutul (AZE; RUS)
Svan (GEO)
Tabasaran (RUS)
Tat (AZE)
Tindi (RUS)
Trukhmen (RUS)
Tsakhur (AZE; RUS)
Tsez (RUS)
Ubykh (RUS)
Udi (2) (AZE; GEO)

26
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Caucasus
45°E

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

45°N

50°E
Kalmyk

Alabugat Tatar

n
Kuba

Krasnodar

Map 11

RUSSIAN FEDERATION

45°N

Adyge

Nevinnomyssk
Trukhmen

Karachay-Balkar
Abaza

Tuapse
Ubykh

Caspian
Kabard-Cherkes

Karachayevsk

Nogay

Tere
k

Sochi
Nalchik
Beslan

Ingush

Svan

Sukhumi

Bagvalal

Sea

Poti

GEORGIA

Tsez

Laz

Hunzib

Hinukh

Bats

Archi

Telavi

Udi

Bohtan
Neo-Aramaic

Rutul

Agul
Lezgian

Hopa

Udi

Khinalug

Kryz

TURKEY

Kars

Gandja

ARMENIA
Lake

EREVAN
0

100

Sevan

200 km

45°E

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Definitely
endangered

Severely
endangered

Critically
endangered

Tat
Budukh

Extinct
(since the 1950s)

Vanadzor

Pontic Greek

40°E

Tabasaran

Zaqatala

Rize

40°N

Juhur

Lak

Tsakhur

TBILISI

Adjara

Dargwa

Bezhta

Akhmeta

Mtskheta
Homshetsma

Vulnerable

Avar
Akhvakh
Khvarshi

Tskhinvali
Gori

Batumi

Karata

Tindi
Inkhokvari

Mingrelian

Kutaisi

Andi

Makhatchkala
Godoberi
Chamalal

Rioni

Black

Botlikh

Vladikavkaz

Ossete

Abkhazia

Kumyk

Grozny

Nazran

Language Vitality

Abkhaz

Homshetsma

Sea

Chechen

AZERBAIJAN
Kura
Former
Nagorno-Karabakh
Autonomous Oblast

BAKU
40°N
50°E

Map 12 Middle East
Ashtiani (IRN)
Barzani Jewish Neo-Aramaic
(2) (IRQ; ISR)

Bashkardi (IRN)
Bathari (OMN)
Cappadocian Greek (TUR)
Coptic (EGY)
Cypriot Arabic (CYP)
Dahaalik (ERI)
Dari (IRN)
Domari (EGY; ISR; JOR; LBN; LBY; PSE;
SYR)

Dzhidi (IRN)
Gazi (IRN)
Harsusi (OMN)
Hawrami (IRN; IRQ)
Hértevin (TUR)
Hobyot (OMN; YEM)
Hulaula (2) (IRN; ISR)
Jibbali (OMN)
Judeo-Berber (ISR)

Judezmo (ISR)
Juhur (ISR)
Khalaj (IRN)
Khojki (OMN)
Khorasani Turk (IRN)
Khunsari (IRN)
Kilit (AZE)
Kolami (IND)
Koroshi (IRN)
Kumzari (OMN)
Lari (IRN)
Lishan Didan (2) (IRN; ISR)
Lishana Deni (2) (IRQ; ISR)
Lishanid Noshan (2) (IRQ; ISR)
Mandaic (IRN; IRQ)
Mehri (OMN; YEM)
Mlahso (2) (SYR; TUR)
Moghol (AFG)
Moroccan Judeo-Arabic (ISR)
Nahali (IND)
Naiki (IND)

Natanzi (IRN)
Nayini (IRN)
Nihali (IND)
Razihi (YEM)
Semnani (IRN)
Senaya (IRN)
Sivandi (IRN)
Soi (IRN)
Soqotri (YEM)
Suret (ARM; IRN; IRQ; SYR; TUR)
Talysh (AZE; IRN)
Tati (IRN)
Tunisian Judeo-Arabic (ISR)
Turoyo (SYR; TUR)
Vafsi (IRN)
Western Armenian (IRQ; LBN;
SYR)

Western Neo-Aramaic (SYR)
Yiddish (ISR)
Zazaki (TUR)
Zidgali (OMN)

28
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Middle East Map 12
Hértevin

30°E

Zazaki Mlahso
Lishana
Turoyo
Deni
Mlahso

Cappadocian Greek

TURKEY

CYPRUS

DAMASCUS

Khunsari

Dzhidi

s
te

WEST BANK

TEL AVIV

BAGHDAD

30°N

Dari
Mandaic

EGYPT

Soi

(ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF)

JORDAN
KUWAIT
CITY

Persian
Gulf

Bashkardi

In

r
ve
Ri

NEW DELHI

MANAMA

Kumzari

INDIA

ABU

RIYADH

Red
Sea

Definitely
endangered

SAUDI ARABIA

UNITED
ARAB
EMIRATES

Mecca

Gulf of Oman
Zidgali

Sur

Yiddish
Judezmo

Harsusi

Extinct
(since the 1950s)

KHARTOUM

Hobyot

ERITREA

JudeoBerber

Arabian
Sea

YEMEN

Dahaalik
SANA'A

ASMARA

Bathari

Mehri

Razihi

Al Mukalla

Soqotri

40°E

DJIBOUTI
DJIBOUTI

Gulf of Aden
50°E

SOMALIA

Socotra

60°E

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

J
O
R
D
A
N

Naiki

Mumbai

Lishanid
Noshan
Juhur
ISRAEL

Barzani
Jewish
Neo-Aramaic

Indian
Ocean

Eastern Africa map

ETHIOPIA

Tunisian
Judeo-Arabic
Lishana
WEST
Deni
BANK

Lishan
Didan

Abha

Kolami

Hulaula Domari

Moroccan
Judeo-Arabic

Jibbali

SUDAN

Nahali
Nihali

OMAN

Severely
endangered

Critically
endangered

Karachi

Khojki
MUSCAT

ZA

ile
N

BAHRAIN

Vulnerable

Language Vitality

s

du

Lari

QATAR DHABI

30°E

30°N
Western Himalaya map

Shiraz

DOHA

20°N

PAKISTAN

Koroshi

Sivandi

KUWAIT

Coptic

ISLAMABAD

IRAN

Gazi

CAIRO

KABUL

AFGHANISTAN

Nayini

GAZA

ISRAEL

Herat

Natanzi

IRAQ

AMMAN

Moghol

Semnani

GA

Alexandria

Ashtiani

ra

GOLAN

TEHRAN

Vafsi

is

BEIRUT

CHINA

Amu
Dar y
a

Khalaj

Hawrami

ph

Mediterranean
Sea

Western
Neo-Aramaic

Eu

LEBANON

TURKMENISTAN
Khorasani Turk

Senaya

Tigr

Western
Armenian

NICOSIA

Lishanid
Noshan

TAJIKISTAN

UZB.

ASHGABAT

Sea

Barzani Jewish
Neo-Aramaic
Hulaula

SYRIAN ARAB
REPUBLIC

50°E

Caspian

Talysh

Kilit

Suret
Cypriot Arabic

AZ. 40°E

Tati

Lishan
Didan

0

250

500 km

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Map 13 Northern Africa
Arvanitika (GRC)
Awjila (LBY)
Bade (NGA)
Berakou (TCD)
Berti (SDN)
Birgid (SDN)
Campidanese (ITA)
Coptic (EGY)
Corfiot Italkian (GRC)
Figuig (MAR)
Gallo-Sicilian (ITA)
Gardiol (ITA)
Ghadames (LBY)
Ghomara (MAR)
Griko (ITA)
Imeraguen (MRT)
Jola-Kassa (SEN)
Judeo-Berber (MAR)

Kendeje (TCD)
Korandje (DZA)
Logudorese (ITA)
Massalat (TCD)
Menik (SEN)
Moroccan Judeo-Arabic
(MAR)

Nafusi (LBY)
Nemadi (MRT)
Noon (SEN)
Paloor (SEN)
Pana (BFA)
Sanhaja of Srair (MAR)
Sawkna (LBY)
Sened (TUN)
Sicilian (ITA)
Siwi (EGY)
Tacenwit (DZA)

Tagargrent (DZA)
Tamaceq (MLI)
Tamahaq (2) (DZA; LBY)
Tamajeq (NER)
Tamazight (4) (DZA; MAR; TUN)
Tamzabit (DZA)
Tasnusit (DZA)
Tayurayt (DZA)
Taznatit (DZA)
Tetserret (NER)
Tidikelt (DZA)
Touggourt Tamazight (DZA)
Tsakonian (GRC)
Tunisian Judeo-Arabic (TUN)
Ubykh (TUR)
Zenaga (2) (ESH; MRT)
Zenatiya (DZA)

30
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Northern Africa Map 13
0°

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Vulnerable

Tayurayt

Definitely
Severely
Critically
Extinct
endangered endangered endangered (since the 1950s)

Sicily

Tacenwit

Sened

Tamazight

Ghomara

Atlantic

Moroccan
Judeo-Arabic

Tunisian
Judeo-Arabic

Tamazight

Madeira

Ocean

Mediterranean Sea

Crete

TRIPOLI
Tobruk

Figuig

Alexandria
Tagargrent

Judeo-Berber

30°N

Tsakonian

Nafusi

Touggourt
Tamazight

Tamzabit

MOROCCO

Griko

MALTA

TUNISIA

Tamazight Tasnusit

RABAT
Casablanca

TURKEY

ATHENS

TUNIS

Zenatiya

Ubykh

Arvanitika

Sicilian

ALGIERS

30°E

GREECE

Corfiot
Italkian

Gallo-Sicilian

Sanhaja of Sraira
Tamazight

20°E

ITALY Gardiol

Campidanese

Balearic Islands

SPAIN

Language Vitality

10°E

Sardinia

Ghadames
Korandje

Taznatit

ALGERIA

CAIRO

LIBYAN ARAB
Siwi

JAMAHIRIYA

Adrâr

Coptic

Canary Islands

Sabha

ile
N

Tidikelt

Sawkna
Awjila

EGYPT

Tamahaq

Western
Sahara
Tamahaq

Tamanrasset
Zenaga

Zouar

MAURITANIA

20°N
Imeraguen

MALI
NOUAKCHOTT

SUDAN

NIGER

Nemadi

CHAD

Tamaceq

Niger

Zenaga

Paloor

Tamajeq

Noon

Tetserret

SENEGAL
DAKAR
Jola-Kassa

BANJUL

GAMBIA

20°N

Pana
Menik

BAMAKO

Kendeje

BURKINA
FASO

Bade

NIAMEY

NIGERIA

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Berakou

Birgid

Berti

Massalat

20°E

0

200

400 km

Map 14 Western Africa

32

Akum (CMR; NGA)
Animere (GHA)
Bade (NGA)
Badiaranke (GIN)
Baga Kalem (GIN)
Baga Manduri (GIN)
Baga Mboteni (GIN)
Baga Sitemu (GIN)
Bainouk-Gunyaamolo (SEN)
Bainouk-Samik (SEN)
Bakole (CMR)
Bakpinka (NGA)
Baldemu (CMR)
Bandial (SEN)
Banka (MLI)
Bassari (SEN)
Bati (CMR)
Bayot (SEN)
Beezen (CMR)
Benga (GAB; GNQ)
Berakou (TCD)
Besme (TCD)
Bikya (CMR)
Bishuo (CMR)
Bom (SLE)
Bonjo (COG)
Boor (TCD)
Boro (TGO)
Bubia (CMR)
Bung (CMR)
Busuu (CMR)
Bwisi (COG; GAB)
Cambap (CMR)
Cobiana (GNB; SEN)
Defaka (NGA)

Dimbong (CMR)
Duguza (NGA)
Dulbu (NGA)
Duli (CMR)
Ediamat (GNB)
Ega (CIV)
Eman (CMR)
Eotile (CIV)
Fania (TCD)
Fyem (NGA)
Gadang (TCD)
Geji cluster (NGA)
Gera (NGA)
Gey (CMR)
Goundo (TCD)
Gura (NGA)
Gurdu-Mbaaru (NGA)
Gusilay (SEN)
Gyele (CMR; GNQ)
Gyem (NGA)
Hijuk (CMR)
Horo (TCD)
Hya (CMR; NGA)
Ilue (NGA)
Isu (CMR)
Iyive (CMR)
Jaya (TCD)
Jeri (CIV)
Jilbe (NGA)
Jola-Kassa (SEN)
Kaande (GAB)
Kamara (GHA)
Karang (TCD)
Karone (SEN)
Kasanga (GNB)

Kendem (CMR)
Kim (SLE)
Kiong (NGA)
Koke (TCD)
Kona (NGA)
Konni (GHA)
Kudu-Camo (NGA)
Kuk (CMR)
Kung (CMR)
Kwatay (SEN)
Laal (TCD)
Langa (CMR)
Luri (NGA)
Mabiri (TCD)
Mahongwe (GAB)
Majera (CMR)
Mambai (TCD)
Mancagne (SEN)
Mani (GIN; SLE)
Maslam (CMR; TCD)
Mbara (TCD)
Menik (SEN)
Miltu (TCD)
Mlomp (SEN)
Mo-peng (SLE)
Mono (CMR)
Mvanip (NGA)
Nagumi (CMR)
Nalu (GIN)
Ndai (CMR)
Ndunda (NGA)
Ngombe (CAF)
Ngong (CMR)
Ngwaba (NGA)
Njerep (CMR)

Noon (SEN)
Noy (TCD)
Nubaca (CMR)
Odut (NGA)
Paloor (SEN)
Pana (BFA)
Polci cluster (NGA)
Pukur (GIN)
Reshe (NGA)
Saba (TCD)
Sake (GAB)
Sambe (NGA)
Sarwa (TCD)
Sei (SLE)
Sighu (GAB)
Somyev (CMR; NGA)
Tafi (GHA)
Tamki (TCD)
Tchitchege (GAB)
Tchumbuli (BEN)
Tetserret (NER)
Tonjon (CIV)
Tuotomb (CMR)
Tuwuli (GHA)
Ubi (TCD)
Ukhwejo (CAF)
Vumbu (GAB)
Yangkam (NGA)
Yasa (CMR; GNQ)
Zeem (NGA)
Zirenkel (TCD)
Zumaya (CMR)

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Western Africa Map 14
0°

SENEGAL

BANJUL

Badiaranke

BISSAU

Nalu

Baga Mboteni

Pukur

Kudu-Camo

Zaria

BoboDioulasso

Kankan

BENIN
Konni

TOGO

Mani

SIERRA
LEONE
Bo

Bom

LIBERIA

Gura

Animere

YAMOUSSOUKRO

Ega

PORTONOVO

LOMÉ

Eotile

ACCRA

Abidjan

Sambe

Bakpinka

Gulf of

Ediamat
Bayot

0°

Gadang

Boor

Koke

Nagumi

Ndai

Fania
Horo
Noy

Mono
Karang

Ngong

CAMEROON

Tuotomb Dimbong
Nubaca
Bakole
Bati
Isu
Hijuk
Bubia

YAOUNDÉ

Douala

CENTRAL
AFRICAN
REPUBLIC
Ngombe BANGUI
Ukhwejo

PRINCIPE

Atlantic

SAO TOME
Bishuo NIGERIA

Busuu
Beezen

Mahongwe

LIBREVILLE

CONGO

Tchitchege
Vumbu

Bwisi

Njerep

0

Sighu

GABON

Port-Gentil

Cambap
Kuk

Ouesso

Benga

Sake

Langa

CAMEROON

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Río Muni

Bung

Kung
Definitely
Severely
Critically
Extinct
endangered endangered endangered (since the 1950s)

Bonjo

Kaande

Bikya

Akum

Sao Tome

Bata

Somyev

Ndunda

Mvanip

Language Vitality

Yasa
Gyele

EQUATORIAL
Principe
SAO TOME AND

South
Ocean

Vulnerable

Ilue

GUINEA

GUINEA
BISSAU

Bainouk-Samik
Kasanga
Cobiana

Kendem

MALABO

Guinea

Gusilay
Kwatay

Eman

Odut

Sarwa

Miltu
Laal
Mambai
Besme
Gey Duli
Goundo

Kona

r
ive
eR
u
n
Be

Tamki

Bioko

SENEGAL
Bandial

Baldemu

Iyive

Lagos

Defaka

Bainouk- Jola-Kassa
Mlomp Gunyaamolo
Mancagne

Mbara

Zumaya
Hya

Gurdu-Mbaaru

Yangkam

Kiong

GAMBIA

Ngwaba

Dulbu

NIGERIA

Tuwuli
Tafi

Lake
Volta

Gera

Gyem

Ubi

Saba

Majera

Jilbe

Geji cluster

Luri

ABUJA
Ni
ger
Riv
er

GHANA

MONROVIA

Karone

Jaya

Maslam

Fyem

Boro
Tonjon

Polci cluster
Duguza
Zeem

Tchumbuli

Kamara

CÔTE
D'IVOIRE

Nzerekore

Tamale

Korhogo

Jeri

Kim

Mo-peng

Berakou

Bade

Banka

GUINEA

Sei

Mabiri
Zirenkel

N'DJAMENA

CONAKRY
FREETOWN

NIAMEY

OUAGADOUGOU

Baga Manduri

Baga Sitemu

Lake
Chad

Zinder

Reshe

Baga Kalem

10°N

Pana

BURKINA
FASO

BAMAKO

Menik
Bassari

GUINEA
BISSAU

CHAD

Mopti

r
ive
rR
ge
i
N

GAMBIA

NIGER

Tamale

MALI

Co
ngo
Riv
er

Paloor

10°E

Tetserret

Noon

200

0°

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

D.R. OF

400 km

10°E

Pointe-Noire

BRAZZAVILLE

KINSHASA

THE CONGO

Map 15 Eastern Africa

34

‘Ongota (ETH)
Acheron (SDN)
Afitti (SDN)
Aja (SDN)
Aka (SDN)
Amba (UGA)
Anfillo (ETH)
Arbore (ETH)
Argobba (ETH)
Bai (SDN)
Bambassi (ETH)
Baygo (SDN)
Bayso (ETH)
Beeke (ZAI)
Belanda Bor (SDN)
Beli (SDN)
Berti (SDN)
Birgid (SDN)
Birri (CAF)
Boguru (SDN; ZAI)
Bong’om (KEN)
Bongo (SDN)
Boni (KEN)
Bonjo (COG)
Boro (ETH)
Buga (SDN)
Burji (KEN)
Bussa (ETH)
Chara (ETH)
Dahalo (KEN)
Dair (SDN)
Dilling (SDN)
Dimme (ETH)
Dongotono (SDN)
Ebang (SDN)

El Hugeirat (SDN)
Eliri (SDN)
Elmolo (KEN)
Fania (TCD)
Feroge (SDN)
Fongoro (TCD)
Gafat (ETH)
Gats’ama - Ganjule - Harro
(ETH)

Ge’ez (ETH)
Geme (CAF)
Gule (SDN)
Gweno (TZA)
Hadza (TZA)
Heiban (SDN)
Homa (SDN)
Horo (TCD)
Hozo (ETH)
Ik (UGA)
Indri (SDN)
Jaya (TCD)
Jonkor Bourmataguil (TCD)
K’emant (ETH)
Kadaru (SDN)
Kanga (SDN)
Kari (ZAI)
Karko (SDN)
Karo (ETH)
Katla (SDN)
Keiga (SDN)
Kelo (SDN)
Kendeje (TCD)
Kinare (KEN)
Ko (SDN)
Koke (TCD)

Komo (ETH; SDN)
Kore (KEN)
Krongo (SDN)
Kujarge (TCD)
Kulfa (TCD)
Kwama (ETH)
Kwegu (ETH)
Laal (TCD)
Lafofa (SDN)
Laro (SDN)
Li-Ngbee (ZAI)
Logol (SDN)
Logorik (SDN)
Lorkoti (KEN)
Lumun (SDN)
Mabiri (TCD)
Massalat (TCD)
Mo’da (SDN)
Molo (SDN)
Moro (SDN)
Morokodo (SDN)
Mursi (ETH)
Napore (UGA)
Narim (SDN)
Nayi (ETH)
Nding (SDN)
Ngbinda (ZAI)
Ngile (SDN)
Njalgulgule (SDN)
Noy (TCD)
Nyang’i (UGA)
Omotik (KEN)
Ongamo (KEN)
Opuuo (ETH)
Otoro (SDN)

Oyda (ETH)
Qwarenya (ETH)
Saba (TCD)
Shabo (ETH)
Shatt (SDN)
Shwai (SDN)
Singa (UGA)
Sogoo (KEN)
Soo (UGA)
Suba (KEN; TZA)
Tagoi (SDN)
Talodi (SDN)
Tamki (TCD)
Temein (SDN)
Tennet (SDN)
Tese (SDN)
Thuri (SDN)
Tima (SDN)
Tingal (SDN)
Tirma (SDN)
Tocho (SDN)
Togoyo (SDN)
Toram (TCD)
Ts’amay (ETH)
Tulishi (SDN)
Tumtum (SDN)
Ubi (TCD)
Wali (SDN)
Warnang (SDN)
Yaaku (KEN)
Yem (ETH)
Yulu (CAF; SDN; ZAI)
Zay (ETH)
Zirenkel (TCD)

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Eastern Africa Map 15
20°E
Kendeje

Berti
Temein

Abéché

Al-Fashir

Dilling

Karko

Massalat
Baygo

Tamki
Toram

Fongoro
Thuri

Laal

Fania Kulfa

Njalgulgule

Indri

Horo

Togoyo Aja

Feroge

Noy
Geme

N'Délé

Tese
Ebang
Otoro
Shwai
Ko

Kadaru

Wali
Tima
Tulishi
Katla
Keiga
Logorik
Kanga

Ni
le

Jonkor Bourmataguil

SUDAN

Buga

Gafat
Qwarenya

Komo
Anfillo

Kari

BANGUI

Tirma
Mursi
Kwegu
Karo

Bongo

Homa

Yem

Eliri

Talodi
Gats'ama - Ganjule - Harro

Dimme

Warnang

Krongo

Bussa
Ts'amay
'Ongota
Arbore

Tumtum

Nding
Lafofa

Ik

Gulu

SOMALIA
Soo

r
Congo Rive

Indian

Elmolo

UGANDA

Li-Ngbee

KENYA

Burji

MOGADISHU

Ocean

Bong'om

Beeke

Yaaku

Amba

KAMPALA
Singa

Lake
Language Vitality

RWANDA

Nakuru
Suba

Victoria

Omotik

Definitely
Severely
Critically
Extinct
endangered endangered endangered (since the 1950s)

Kismayo
Kinare
Sogoo

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

BUJUMBURA

30°E

Boni

NAIROBI

Ongamo

UNITED REPUBLIC
OF TANZANIA
BURUNDI

0°

Lorkoti

KIGALI
Vulnerable

Logol

Laro

Nyang'i

DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
Kisangani
OF THE CONGO

Acheron

Napore

r
Rive
Uele

Bonjo

Moro
Heiban

Tagoi

Shatt
Bayso

Tennet Narim Dongotono

Ngbinda

Ngile

Zay

Oyda

Juba

Boguru

Tocho
Lumun

Nayi
Chara

10°N

Hargeisa

ADDIS ABABA

Shabo

Belanda Bor

Dire Dawa

Ge'ez

Hozo

Mo'da

Morokodo

Berbera

Bambassi
Kelo

Opuuo

Birri

Gulf of Aden

DJIBOUTI

Kwama

Bai

CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC

DJIBOUTI

Argobba

Boro

Yulu

Beli

Arabian
Sea

Aden

ETHIOPIA

Molo
Gule

YEMEN

K'emant

Aka

hit
e

Kujarge

Ubi

Koke

Afitti
Tingal

El Hugeirat

W

Saba

ile
eN
Blu

Dair
Jaya Zirenkel
Mabiri

50°E

Red
Sea

A
RE
IT
ER

CHAD

30°E
Birgid

Dahalo

Hadza
Gweno

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Kore

Mombasa

40°E

0

200

400 km

50°E

Map 16 Southern Africa
!Gan!ne (ZAF)
|’Auni (ZAF)
|Gui (BWA)
|Xaise (BWA)
|Xam (ZAF)
Aasax (TZA)
Akie (TZA)
Bolo (ANG)
Burunge (TZA)
Cape Khoekhoe (ZAF)
Danisi (BWA)
Deti (BWA)
Dhaiso (TZA)

Gweno (TZA)
Kami (TZA)
Kede (ANG)
Khwe (NAM)
Korana (ZAF)
Kua (BWA)
Kw’adza (TZA)
Kwadi (ANG)
Kwisi (ANG)
N|uu (ZAF)
Phuthi (LSO)
Segeju (TZA)
Taa (BWA)

Ts’ixa (BWA)
Vidunda (TZA)
Xiri (ZAF)
Yeyi (BWA)
Zaramo (TZA)
||Ani (BWA)
||Gana (BWA)
||Ku ||’e (ZAF)
||Kx’au (ZAF)
||Xegwi (ZAF)
||Hoa (BWA)

36
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Southern Africa Map 16
10°E

20°E
BRAZZAVILLE

KINSHASA

30°E

D. R.

Burunge

DODOMA

Zanzibar

Kami

Zaramo

Co
ng
oR
ive
r

Vidunda

10°S

Dar es Salaam

UNITED REPUBLIC

SEYCHELLES

OF TANZANIA
10°S
COMOROS
MORONI
Grande
Anjouan
Comore
Mohéli

Bolo

Lubumbashi

MALAWI

ANGOLA

Huambo

Ndola

Mayotte

ezi

HARARE

Rundu

ZIMBABWE

||Ani

20°S

Ts'ixa

Yeyi

Ocean
Tromelin Is.

mb

Khwe

Kede

Indian

LUSAKA

Za

Kwisi

Glorioso Is.

LILONGWE

ZAMBIA
Kwadi

50°E

Segeju
Akie
Dhaiso
Aasax

Kw'adza

OF THE CONGO

LUANDA

40°E

Gweno

Bulawayo

Danisi

E
U
Q
I
B
M
ZA
O
M

Juan de
Nova

MADAGASCAR
ANTANANARIVO

Mozambique

MAURITIUS
PORT LOUIS

Beira

NAMIBIA
WINDHOEK

BOTSWANA

Atlantic

Taa

Kua

Toliara

‡Hoa

GABORONE

|'Auni

Ocean

PRETORIA

||Xegwi

MAPUTO

MBABANE

SWAZILAND

Korana
N|uu

Phuthi

MASERU

r
Orange Rive

30°S

St.-Denis
Réunion

|Xaise

|Gui

||Gana

South

Channel

Deti

LESOTHO
||Ku ||'e

Xiri

30°S

Durban

Language Vitality

!Gan!ne
|Xam

Cape Town
0

200

400 km

10°E

Cape of Good Hope

SOUTH AFRICA
||Kx'au

Vulnerable

Cape Khoekhoe

20°E

20°S

30°E

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

40°E

Definitely
Severely
Critically
Extinct
endangered endangered endangered (since the 1950s)

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Map 17 North-eastern Asia
Ainu (3) (JPN; RUS)
Aleut (RUS)
Alutor (RUS)
Arman (RUS)
Baraba Tatar (RUS)
Bashkir (RUS)
Buryat (3) (CHN; MNG; RUS)
Central Selkup (RUS)
Central Siberian Yupik (2) (RUS;
USA)

Chukchi (RUS)
Chulym Turk (RUS)
Copper Island Aleut (RUS)
Dagur (CHN)
Dolgan (RUS)
Dukha (MNG)
East Cape Yupik (RUS)
Eastern Khanty (RUS)
Eastern Mansi (RUS)
Even (2) (RUS)
Evenki (4) (CHN; MNG; RUS)
Forest Enets (RUS)
Forest Nenets (RUS)
Forest Yukagir (RUS)
Inari Saami (FIN)
Itelmen (RUS)

Kamas (RUS)
Kamas Turk (RUS)
Kerek (RUS)
Ket (RUS)
Khakas (RUS)
Khamnigan Mongol (CHN; MNG;
RUS)

Khövsgöl Uryangkhay (MNG)
Kildin Saami (RUS)
Kilen (CHN; RUS)
Kili (RUS)
Komi (RUS)
Koryak (RUS)
Manchu (CHN)
Nanay (CHN; RUS)
Negidal (RUS)
Nganasan (RUS)
Nivkh (2) (RUS)
North Alaskan Inupiaq (2)
(USA)

North Saami (FIN; NOR; RUS; SWE)
Northern Altay (RUS)
Northern Khanty (RUS)
Northern Mansi (RUS)
Northern Selkup (RUS)
Old Sirenik (RUS)

Orok (RUS)
Permyak (RUS)
Seward Peninsula Inupiaq (3)
(RUS; USA)

Shor (RUS)
Siberian Tatar (RUS)
Skolt Saami (FIN; NOR; RUS)
Southern Altay (RUS)
Southern Khanty (RUS)
Southern Mansi (RUS)
Southern Selkup (RUS)
Soyot (RUS)
Tazy (RUS)
Ter Saami (RUS)
Tofa (RUS)
Tundra Enets (RUS)
Tundra Nenets (RUS)
Tundra Yukagir (RUS)
Tuvan (CHN; MNG; RUS)
Udege (RUS)
Udmurt (RUS)
Ulcha (RUS)
Western Mansi (RUS)
Yakut (RUS)
Yazva Komi (RUS)
Yug (RUS)

38
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Vulnerable

North Saami

Murmansk

Novaya
Zemlya

Barents
Sea

Akkala Saami
Kildin Saami

60
°N

Perm

60

RUSSIAN FEDERATION

Eastern Mansi

Yakut

i

Sea of

Baraba
Tatar Tomsk

Novosibirsk

Kamas Turk
Kamas
Chulym
Turk
Khakas

Pavlodar

Negidal
Ulcha

Krasnoyarsk

Barnaul

Soyot

Irkutsk
500 km

80°E

Tuvan

MONGOLIA

Dukha

Buryat

Khövsgöl
Uryangkhay

100°E

Ulan-Ude

Evenki

Nivkh

Chita
Khamnigan
Mongol

Buryat

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Evenki

Nanay

ur
Am

Lake Baikal

Shor

Southern Altay

Evenki

lin
Ainu

Kuril
Islands

Oroch

Tofa

Northern Altay

50

Orok

Nivkh

a
kh
Sa

Omsk

E

Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy

Okhotsk

Southern
Selkup

Qostanay

Yakutsk

Central
Selkup

Siberian
Tatar

250

Even

0°

Yug

Ir
ty
sh

KAZAKHSTAN

0

Magadan

16

Ob

Southern
Khanty

Petropavlovsk

ASTANA

Arman

Tura

e
Yenis

Eastern Khanty

l
bo
To

Len
a
Evenki

Ket

Aleut

Itelmen

Northern
Selkup

Forest
Nenets

Khanty-Mansiysk
Southern Mansi

Copper
Island
Aleut

Palana

Northern
Khanty

Bashkir

Ufa

Even

Forest
Enets

Yazva Komi

Forest
Yukagir

Dudinka

Salekhard

Western Mansi

Udmurt

°E

Koryak

Dolgan

Northern Mansi
Permyak

60

Tundra
Yukagir

Alutor

Tundra Nenets

Syktyvkar

0°E

Kerek

Tundra
Enets
Komi

18

Anadyr

Nganasan

°E

Central
Siberian
Yupik

Chukchi

Laptev
Sea

Kara
Sea

Belush'ya

°N

Old Sirenik

East Siberian
Sea

Arkhangelsk

50

70°N

Wrangel I.

Vadsø

Ter Saami

40

East Cape Yupik

°N

FIN.

Seward Peninsula
Inupiaq

Definitely
Severely
Critically
Extinct
endangered endangered endangered (since the 1950s)

Ocean

Skolt Saami

Inari
Saami

N

North Alaskan
Inupiaq

Arctic

NORWAY
E

USA

Language Vitality

Spitsbergen

20°

0°E

80°

E

80°E

°E

0°

°E

60

18

16

140

120°E

70°N

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

100°E

North-eastern Asia Map 17

Manchu

Kili

Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk

Dagur

Buryat

120°E

Birobidzhan

Ainu
Udege

CHINA

Kilen

Ainu

Tazy

140°E

JAPAN

°N

Map 18 Central Asia
Baraba Tatar (RUS)
Bartangi (TJK)
Bashkir (RUS)
Bukharic (UZB)
Central Asian Arabic (AFG; TJK;
UZB)

Chuvash (RUS)
Dungan (KAZ; KGZ)
Eastern Mari (RUS)
Ili Turk (CHN)
Ishkashimi (TJK)
Karagash (RUS)
Khorasani Turk (IRN)
Northern Altay (RUS)
Ongkor Solon (CHN)
Oyrat (CHN; KGZ; MNG)
Parya (AFG; TJK; UZB)
Roshorvi (TJK)

Rushani (AFG; TJK)
Sanglechi (AFG; TJK)
Sarikoli (CHN)
Shor (RUS)
Shughni (AFG; TJK)
Sibe (CHN)
Siberian Tatar (RUS)
Sinkiang Dagur (CHN)
Southern Altay (RUS)
Talysh (AZE; IRN)
Tati (IRN)
Udmurt (RUS)
Wakhi (AFG; CHN; PAK; TJK)
Western Mari (RUS)
Yaghnobi (TJK)
Yazgulami (TJK)
Yurt Tatar (RUS)

40
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Central Asia Map 18
50°E

60°E

Eastern Mari
Chuvash

70°E

Udmurt

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Siberian Tatar

RUSSIAN FEDERATION

Western Mari

Bashkir

Omsk

Ufa

Novosibirsk

Baraba Tatar

Ob
Shor

To
bo
l

Samara

Pavlodar

Northern
Altay

Orenburg
ASTANA

50°N

Ir

Southern
Altay

ty
ch

50°N

Aktobe
Turgai
Ural Riv
er

KAZAKHSTAN

MONG.

Ongkor Solon
Karagash

Atyrau
Sinkiang Dagur

Yurt Tatar

Oyrat

Lake Balkhash

Caucasus map

Aral
Sea

Sy

Ili Turk

rD

ar

ya

Ürümqi

Sibe

Almaty

CHINA

BISHKEK

Nukus

Caspian
AZERBAIJAN
40°N

BAKU

KYRGYZSTAN
TASHKENT

Nar yn

Sea
Fergana

Bukharic

Türkmenbaşy

0

TURKMENISTAN

Talysh
Tati

ASHGABAT
Khorasani Turk

50°E

UZBEKISTAN

Urgench

Dungan

IRAN
(ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF)

Am
u

250

400 km

40°N

Bukhara
D
ar
ya

Mary

TAJIKISTAN
Parya
Yaghnobi

DUSHANBE
Yazgulami

Termez
Central Asian
Arabic AFGHANISTAN Sanglechi

Roshorvi
Bartangi
Wakhi
Rushani
Shughni
Ishkashimi

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Language Vitality
Sarikoli

Vulnerable

Definitely
Severely
Critically
Extinct
endangered endangered endangered (since the 1950s)

80°E

Map 19 Western Himalaya
Ashkun (AFG)
Baghati (IND)
Balti (IND; PAK)
Bangani (IND)
Bartangi (TJK)
Bashkarik (PAK)
Bateri (PAK)
Bhadravahi (IND; PAK)
Bhalesi (IND)
Bharmauri (IND)
Brahui (AFG; IRN; PAK)
Brokshat (IND)
Bunan (IND)
Burushaski (PAK)
Byangsi (IND; NPL)
Central Asian Arabic (AFG; TJK;
UZB)

Chambeali (IND)
Chantyal (NPL)
Chilisso (PAK)
Churahi (IND)
Dameli (PAK)
Darma (IND; NPL)
Dol-po (NPL)

Domaaki (PAK)
Gambiri (AFG)
Garhwali (IND)
Gawar-Bati (AFG; PAK)
Gowro (PAK)
Gyasumdo (NPL)
Handuri (IND)
Ishkashimi (TJK)
Jad (IND; PAK)
Jangshung (IND)
Jaunsari (IND)
Kaike (NPL)
Kalasha (PAK)
Kanashi (IND)
Kangdi (IND)
Kati (AFG; PAK)
Kham (NPL)
Khasali (IND)
Khowar (PAK)
Kinnauri (IND)
Kului (IND)
Kumaoni (IND; NPL)
Kundal Shahi (IND; PAK)
Ladakhi (CHN; IND)

Limirong Tibetan (NPL)
Loke Tibetan (NPL)
Mahasui (IND)
Maiya (PAK)
Manchad (IND)
Mandeali (IND)
Munji (AFG)
Narpa (NPL)
Ningalami (AFG)
Nupri (NPL)
Nyishangba (NPL)
Ormuri (AFG; PAK)
Padri (IND)
Pangvali (IND)
Parachi (AFG)
Parya (AFG; TJK; UZB)
Pashayi (AFG)
Phalura (PAK)
Prasun (AFG)
Purik (IND; PAK)
Rangkas (IND)
Raute (NPL)
Rongpo (IND)
Roshorvi (TJK)

Rushani (AFG; TJK)
Sanglechi (AFG; TJK)
Sarikoli (CHN)
Savi (AFG; PAK)
Seke (NPL)
Shughni (AFG; TJK)
Shumashti (AFG)
Sirmaudi (IND)
Spiti (IND; PAK)
Thakali (NPL)
Tinan (CHN; IND)
Tirahi (AFG)
Tolcha (IND)
Torwali (PAK)
Tsum (NPL)
Ushojo (PAK)
Waigali (AFG)
Wakhi (AFG; CHN; PAK; TJK)
Wotapuri-Katarqalai (AFG)
Yaghnobi (TJK)
Yazgulami (TJK)
Yidgha (PAK)
Zangskari (IND; PAK)

42
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Western Himalaya Map 19
70°E

Samarquand

Garm

Qarshi

UZBEKISTAN

80°E

Kashgar

The designations employed and the presentation
of material on this map do not imply the expression
of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO
concerning the legal status of any country, territory,
city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the
delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

TAJIKISTAN

DUSHANBE Yazgulami

TU
RK
M
EN
IS
Am TAN

Parya

Yaghnobi

Dotted line represents approximately
the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir
agreed upon by India and Pakistan.
The final status of Jammu and Kashmir
has not yet been agreed upon by the parties.

Yarkand

Murghab

Roshorvi
Bartangi
Rushani

Kurgan
Tepe

uD
ar y
a

75°E

KYRGYZSTAN

CHINA

Sarikoli

Shughni

Termez

Khorog

Fayzabad

Hotan

Wakhi

Ishkashimi
Central Asian Arabic

Kunduz

Sanglechi
Munji

Khowar

Phalura
Kalasha
Kati
Prasun
Waigali

AFGHANISTAN

Gambiri
Ashkun

Pashayi

35°N

Parachi

KABUL

WotapuriKatarqalai
Tirahi

Domaaki
Burushaski

Yidgha

Shumashti

Dameli Torwali
Gilgit
Bashkarik
Maiya
Savi
Chilisso
Gowro

Balti

Bateri Ushojo
Ningalami
Gawar-Bati

Kundal Shahi

and

Vulnerable

Aksai
Chin

Zangskari

In
du
s

Purik

Bhadravahi
Bhalesi

ISLAMABAD

Siachen
Glacier
Brokshat

Srinagar

Peshawar
Ghazni

Jammu

Kashmir

Language Vitality

Mazar-e Sharif

Ladakhi

Padri
Pangvali
Churahi
Chambeali

Bunan

Definitely
endangered

35°N

Severely
endangered

Critically
endangered

Manchad
Spiti

Ormuri

Bharmauri

Kangdi

Tinan

Ind
us

Gujranwala
Kandahar

Khasali
Kanashi

Faisalabad

Lahore

Mandeali

Extinct
(since the 1950s)
Jangshung

Kului Kinnauri

Amritsar

Mahasui
Baghati
Handuri

Rongpo
Jaunsari

Multan

Quetta

Jad

Sirmaudi

PAKISTAN
30°N

INDIA

Garhwali

Bangani

Brahui

100

Darma

ah

200 km

NEW DELHI
70°E

75°E

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Loke
Tibetan

pu

tra

Dol-po

NEPAL
Raute

80°E

ma

Limirong
Tibetan

Kumaoni

es
Gang

0

Tolcha

Br

Byangsi

Rangkas

Kaike

Nyishangba
Gyasumdo
Narpa

Seke
Thakali

Nupri

Kham
Chantyal

Tsum

30°N

Map 20 Central Himalaya
A’tong (IND)
Adi (CHN; IND)
Ahom (IND)
Aimol (IND)
Aiton (IND)
Aka (IND)
Anal (IND)
Andro (IND)
Angami (IND)
Angika (IND; NPL)
Ao (IND)
Apatani (IND)
Athpahariya (NPL)
Bahing (NPL)
Bangni (IND)
Bantawa (NPL)
Baraˉm (NPL)
Biete (IND)
Bishnupriya Manipuri
Creole (BGD; IND)
Black Mountain (BTN)
Bodo (IND)
Bokar (CHN; IND)
Bori (CHN; IND)
Brokkat (BTN)
Brokpa (BTN)
Bumthang (BTN)
Byangsi (IND; NPL)
Chali (BTN)
Chamling (NPL)
Chang (IND)
Chantyal (NPL)
Chawte (MMR)

Chepang (NPL)
Chintang (NPL)
Chi-li-ng (NPL)
Cho-ca-nga-ca-kha
(BTN)

Chokri (IND)
Cuona Menba (BTN; CHN;
IND)

Dakpa (BTN; IND)
Danuwar (NPL)
Darai (NPL)
Darma (IND; NPL)
Deori (IND)
Dhimal (NPL)
Dimasa (IND)
Dol-po (NPL)
Dumi (NPL)
Dungmali (NPL)
Dura (NPL)
Dzala (BTN)
Dzongkha (BTN)
Galo (IND)
Ganan (MMR)
Gangte (IND)
Ghale (NPL)
Gongduk (BTN)
Gurung (NPL)
Gyasumdo (NPL)
Ha-lung Tibetan (NPL)
Hayu (NPL)
Hill Miri (IND)
Hmar (IND)
Hrangkhol (IND)

Idu (CHN; IND)
Jero (NPL)
Jirel (NPL)
Kabui (IND)
Kachari (IND)
Kadu (MMR)
Kaˉgate (NPL)
Kaike (NPL)
Karbi (IND)
Khaccad. Bhot. e (NPL)
Khaling (NPL)
Kham (NPL)
Khamba (CHN; IND)
Khasi (IND)
Kheng (BTN)
Kheza (IND)
Khiamngan (IND)
Khoirao (IND)
Khowa (IND)
Koch (IND)
Kohi (NPL)
Koireng (IND)
Kokborok (BGD; IND)
Kom (IND)
Konyak (IND)
Kulung (NPL)
Kumaˉle (NPL)
Kumaoni (IND; NPL)
Kurtöp (BTN)
Kurux (2) (BGD; NPL)
Kusunda (NPL)
Lakha (BTN)
Lamgang (IND)

Langrong (IND)
Langthang Tibetan
(NPL)

Lepcha (BTN; IND; NPL)
Lhokpu (BTN)
Lhota (IND)
Liangmai (IND)
Limbu (IND; NPL)
Limirong Tibetan (NPL)
Lishpa (IND)
Lohorung (NPL)
Loke Tibetan (NPL)
Magar (NPL)
Majhi (NPL)
Malin (MMR)
Malto (IND)
Mao (IND)
Mara (IND)
Maram (IND)
Maring (IND)
Mech (IND)
Meithei (IND)
Mewahang (NPL)
Miji (IND)
Miju (CHN; IND)
Milang (IND)
Minyong (IND)
Mising (IND)
Mizo (IND)
Motuo Menba (CHN; IND)
Moyon (IND)
Mra (CHN; IND)
Mzieme (IND)

44
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Na (CHN; IND)
Nachiring (NPL)
Narpa (NPL)
Newar (NPL)
Nocte (IND)
Nruanghmei (IND)
Nupbikha (BTN)
Nupri (NPL)
Nyenkha (BTN)
Nyishangba (NPL)
Nyishi (IND)
Padam (IND)
Paite (IND)
Pasi (IND)
Phom (IND)
Pochuri (IND)
Puma (NPL)
Purum (IND)
Rabha (IND)
Raji (NPL)
Rangkas (IND)
Raute (NPL)
Rengma (IND)
Ruga (IND)
Saˉm (NPL)
Sampang (NPL)
Sangtam (IND)
Sataˉr (NPL)
Seke (NPL)
Sengmai (IND)
Sherdukpen (IND)
Sherpa (CHN; IND; NPL)
Shingsaba (CHN; NPL)

Simi (IND)
Sulung (CHN; IND)
Sunwar (NPL)
Surel (NPL)
Tagin (IND)
Tai Nora (IND)
Tai Phake (IND)
Tai Rong (IND)
Taman (MMR)
Tamang (IND; NPL)
Tangam (IND)
Tangkhul (IND)
Tangsa (IND)
Tarao (IND)
Taruang (CHN; IND; MMR)
Thado (IND)
Thakali (NPL)
Thangmi (NPL)
Thulung (NPL)
Tilung (NPL)
Tiwa (IND)
Tolcha (IND)
Toto (IND) (
Tshangla (BTN; CHN; IND)
Tsum (NPL)
Wambule (NPL)
Wancho (IND)
Yakkha (NPL)
Yamphu (NPL)
Yimchungru (IND)
Zeme (IND)

Central Himalaya Map 20
85°E

Mewahang

Byangsi

Limirong
Tibetan

Kumaoni

Dol-po

Dadeldhurā

Kaike

NEPAL

Raute

’Loke
Tibetan
Thakali

Raji

Majhi

Bori
Bokar
Na

’Langthang Tibetan
Bumthang

Baram Newar
Thangmi
Kusunda
Darai
Kumale Chepang
Tamang

KĀTHMĀNDU

’Nyenkha

THIMPU
Ilām

Lucknow

G

an

ge

Rājbirāj

ak
nd
Ga

Ch
auk
a

Mra
Bangni

Mech

Aka
Khowa

Toto

s

Kurux

Ko

si

Patna
Benares

So
n

Ganges

25°N
Angika

INDIA

Karbi

Khasi

Tiwa

100

200 km

85°E

Mising

Rengma
Angami
Mzieme

Pasi
Taruang

nese

Lin

e

Tangsa
Tai
Nocte
Phake
Tai Konyak Wancho
Nora
Tai
Rong
Phom Cuona
Menba
Ao
Simi

Sangtam
Chang
Khiamngan
Yimchungru
Chokri

Biete

Kheza Pochuri
Khoirao
Maram
Kachari
A'tong
Ruga
Tangkhul
Liangmai Mao
Taman
25°N
Nruanghmei
Andro
Kabui
Maring
Dimasa Hmar
Meithei
Bishnupriya
Malin
Aimol
Ganan
Thado
Manipuri Creole
Sengmai
Moyon
Langrong
Kadu
Paite
Anal Chawte
Hrangkhol
Kom
Lamgang
Kokborok
Agartala
Koireng

Shillong

Zeme

DHAKA

Aizawl
Mara

Rānchi

Jabalpur

Padam

BANGLADESH
Rājshāhi

Malto

Koch

Apatani
Deori

Lhota

Rabha

Rangpur

Hill Miri

Aiton

Brahmaputra

Birātnagar

Idu

Miju

Bodo

Sherdukpen
Ahom

Milang

Chi

Nyishi

Nupbikha

e
Lin
ian
Ind

Adi
Minyong
Galo

Tagin

Lishpa Miji

Kurtöp

Chali
Black
Mountain
Kheng
Lhokpu BHUTAN Gongduk Tshangla

Lepcha

Motuo
Menba

Sulung

Dispur

Allahābād

0

Kurux Dhimal Satar

Cho-ca-ngaca-kha
Dzala Dakpa
Brokpa

Brokkat
Lakha

Dzongkha

Hayu

Kānpur

Brahmaputra

Gurung Dura

Bhairawa

Khamba

Tsum

Ghale

Chantyal
Magar

Tangam

Khaccad
Bhode

Gyasumdo

Salyān

30°N

Lhasa
Xigazê

’Narpa
Nupri

Definitely
Severely
Critically
Extinct
endangered endangered endangered (since the 1950s)

CHINA

Seke

Kham

Dhangadhi

Vulnerable

NEPAL

’Nyishangba

Jumlā

Language Vitality

Meg
hna

Darma

Tolcha

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Sherpa
Shingsaba
Nachiring
Jirel
Khaling
Yamphu
Surel
Kulung
Thulung
Ha-lung
Tibetan
Kagate
Bahing
Lohorung
Sam
Dungmali
Kohi
Sunwar
Dumi
Yakkha Limbu
Jero
Wambule
Bantawa
Tilung
Chamling
Athpahariya
Puma
Danuwar
Chintang Chiling
Sampang

CHINA

Rangkas

90°E

CHINA

90°E

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Mizo

Gangte
Purum
Tarao

Ir rawad
dy

80°E

MYANMAR
95°E

Map 21 Indian Subcontinent
Asur (IND)
Badaga (IND)
Bawm (BGD; IND)
Bellari (IND)
Bhumji (IND)
Birhor (IND)
Chung (THA)
Danaw (MMR)
Gadaba (IND)
Geta? (IND)
Gondi (IND)
Gorum (IND)
Great andamanese (IND)
Gutob (IND)
Ho (IND)
Irula (IND)
Jarawa (IND)
Juang (IND)
Kharia (IND)
Koda (IND)
Kodagu (IND)
Kokborok (BGD; IND)
Kolami (IND)
Konda (IND)

Koraga (IND)
Korku (IND)
Korwa (IND)
Kota (IND)
Kui (IND)
Kurru (IND)
Kuruba (IND)
Kurux (IND)
Kuvi (IND)
Lamongse (IND)
Lavua (THA)
Luro (IND)
Malto (IND)
Manda (IND)
Mara (IND)
Mizo (IND)
Moklen (MMR; THA)
Mon (MMR; THA)
Mru (MMR)
Mundari (IND)
Muot (IND)
Nahali (IND)
Naiki (IND)
Nihali (IND)

Onge (IND)
Palaung (MMR)
Pale (MMR)
Parji (IND)
Pengo (IND)
Phalok (THA)
Pu (IND)
Pyu (MMR)
Remo (IND)
Riang (MMR)
Rumai (MMR)
Sak (2) (BGD; MMR)
Sanenyo (IND)
Sentilese (IND)
Shompen (IND)
Sora (IND)
Takahanyilang (IND)
Toda (IND)
Tulu (IND)
Turi (IND)
Urak Lawoi (THA)
Vedda (LKA)
Yaw (MMR)

46
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Indian Subcontinent Map 21
Mara

80°E
Bhopal

Gandhinagar

DHAKA

Malto

Jabalpur
Korwa

Nahali

Surat

Palaung

Mizo

Mundari
Asur
Kurux
Kharia
Birhor

Rumai

Kokborok

Koda

Kolkata

Yaw

Mru
Sak

Turi
Ho Bhumji

BANGLADESH

Manda

Korku

Kolami

Gondi

Naiki

Remo

Sora

Kui

NAYPYIDAW

Pengo

Mumbai

Parji
Gadaba
Konda

Gutob

addy
Ir raw

Geta?

Bengal

Gorum

Phalok

Pyu

Bay of

Kuvi

INDIA

Riang

Danaw

Bhubaneshwar

Sal

Nihali

Mandalay

MYANMAR

Sak

Juang

20°N

Pale

Bawm

Chittagong

wee
n

70°E

Hyderabad
Kurru

Lavua

THA.

Yangon
Mon

Panaji
Chung

Arabian

Andaman

Sea

Bangalore
Tulu

Vulnerable

Kodagu Bellari
Irula

Koraga

Lakshadweep

Kuruba

10°N

Language Vitality

Badaga
Definitely
endangered

Sea

Great andamanese
Sentilese

Puducherry

Kota

Port Blair
Onge

Toda

Little
Andaman

Kavaratti
Kochi

Jaffna

THAILAND

Severely
endangered

Thiruvananthapuram

SRI LANKA

Critically
endangered

Kandy
Extinct
(since the 1950s)

Andaman
Islands

Jarawa

Chennai

COLOMBO

Indian

Pu

Ocean

Luro

Muot
Sanenyo

Lamongse
Shompen
Takahanyilang

Vedda

Nicobar
Islands

MALDIVES

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Moklen
Urak Lawoi

Strait of
Malacca

0

200

80°E

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

400 km

90°E

Banda Aceh

INDONESIA

Map 22 Eastern Asia
Ainu (2) (JPN; RUS)
Amami (JPN)
Anung (2) (CHN; MMR)
Aqaw Gelao (CHN)
Baheng (CHN)
Baima (CHN)
Bonan (CHN)
Buryat (3) (CHN; MNG; RUS)
Choyi (CHN)
Dagur (3) (CHN)
Dukha (MNG)
Ersu (CHN)
Evenki (3) (CHN; MNG; RUS)
Gangou (CHN)
Green Gelao (CHN)
Guichong (CHN)
Hachijoˉ (JPN)
Huzhu Monguor (CHN)
Jone (CHN)
Kangjia (CHN)
Khakas (RUS)
Khamnigan Mongol (CHN; MNG;
RUS)

Khampti (IND)

Khövsgöl Uryangkhay (MNG)
Kilen (CHN; RUS)
Kili (RUS)
Kunigami (JPN)
Manchu (2) (CHN)
Manchurian Kirghiz (CHN)
Manchurian Ölöt (CHN)
Miju (CHN; IND)
Minhe Monguor (CHN)
Miqie (CHN)
Mulao (CHN)
Muya (CHN)
Naluo (CHN)
Namuyi (CHN)
Nanay (CHN; RUS)
Negidal (RUS)
Nivkh (2) (RUS)
Northern Altay (RUS)
Northern Tujia (CHN)
Ordos (CHN)
Oroch (RUS)
Orok (RUS)
Oyrat (CHN; KGZ; MNG)
Salar (CHN)

Santa (CHN)
Saryg Yugur (CHN)
Shira Yugur (CHN)
Shixing (CHN)
Shor (RUS)
Singpho (IND)
Solon (CHN)
Southern Altay (RUS)
Southern Tujia (CHN)
Soyot (RUS)
Talu (CHN)
Tangwang (CHN)
Tazy (RUS)
Tofa (RUS)
Tuvan (CHN; MNG; RUS)
Udege (RUS)
Ulcha (RUS)
Waxiang (CHN)
White Gelao (CHN)
Wutun (CHN)
Zaiwa (CHN; IND)
Zhaba (CHN)

48
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Eastern Asia Map 22
90°E

100°E

110°E

120°E

Khakas
Shor

Chita

Buryat

Kyzyl

Yenisey

Evenki
Evenki

Darhan

Manchu
Manchurian
Ölöt

Dagur
Solon

ULAN BATOR

Sakhalin
50°N

Nanay

Amur

Kili

Birobidjan

Oroch

Manchu

Dagur

Ainu

Manchurian
Kirghiz

MONGOLIA

Oyrat

Dagur

Nivkh
Evenki

Belogorsk

Buryat

Borzya

Erdenet

Orok

Ulcha

Khamnigan
Mongol

Khövsgöl
Uryangkhay

KAZ.

Okha

Buryat

Northern Altay

Southern Altay

Nivkh

Zeya
Negidal

Soyot

Dukha

Tuvan

RUSSIAN FEDERATION

Lena

Tofa

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

YuzhnoSakhalinsk

Udege

Kilen

Sea of

Harbin

Okhotsk
Tazy

Ürümqi

Ainu

Vladivostok

Sapporo

Hokkaidō
40°N

Saryg Yugur

Shira Yugur

BEIJING

Language Vitality

Vulnerable

Ordos

CHINA

Definitely
endangered

Severely
endangered

Me

Salween

Choyi

Central Himalaya map

Xi'an

Huang Ho

Ersu

Miju
Tangsa

Zaiwa
Khampti
Anung

Japan

Singpho

INDIA

y

BHUTAN

NM
MYANMAR

Miqie

Aqaw
Gelao

Naluo

Talu

White
Gelao

Yangtze

Wuhan

Northern
Tujia

Osaka

Green
Gelao
Mulao
Red
Gelao

Hachijo

er
Pearl Riv

110°E

Kyūshū

Sea

30°N

Amami

Nansei Islands

Baheng

Okinawan

120°E

Taiwan,
China
Taipei

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Pacific
Ocean

East China

Southern Tujia

TOKYO
Yokohama

Hiroshima

Shanghai

South-eastern Asia map

100°E

JAPAN
Nagoya

Pusan

Sea

Waxiang
Namuyi

Honshū
Sendai

Shikoku

Guichong

Shixing

aw
add

BANG.

Yellow

Chongqing

Irr

Gang
es

REPUBLIC OF
KOREA

Zhaba

Muya

Lhasa

NEPAL

SEOUL

40°N

Sea of

Baima

kon
g

Extinct
(since the 1950s)

Brahmaputra
KĀTHMĀNDU
THIMPU

PYONGYANG

Huzhu
Monguor
Minhe Monguor
Salar
Bonan
Kangjia
Tangwang
Wutun
Santa
Gangou
Jone

Critically
endangered

30°N

DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF KOREA

Kunigami

Miyako

130°E

0

250

500 km

140°E

Map 23 South-eastern Asia
Abai Sungai (MYS)
Aheu (LAO)
Akeu (LAO; MMR; THA)
Alabat Island Agta
(PHL)

Aluo (CHN)
Amis (CHN)
Amok (MMR)
Angku (MMR)
Arem (LAO; VNM)
Arta (PHL)
Ata (PHL)
Ayizi (CHN)
Babuza (CHN)
Baheng (2) (CHN; VNM)
Bana (LAO)
Basay (CHN)
Bataan Ayta (PHL)
Batak (PHL)
Bawm (BGD; IND)
Bisu (MMR; THA)
Bola (CHN)
Brao (KHM; LAO; VNM)
Bru (THA)
Bunun (CHN)
Buyang (CHN)
Camarines Norte Agta
(PHL)

Central Cagayan Agta
(PHL)

50

Chatong (LAO)
Chepya (LAO)
Chesu (CHN)
Chintaw (CHN)
Chong (KHM; THA)

Chrau (VNM)
Chru (VNM)
Chuang (KHM)
Chung (2) (KHM; THA)
Côông (VNM)
Cosung (2) (CHN; VNM)
Dakkang (LAO)
Danaw (MMR)
Dicamay Agta (PHL)
Dupaninan Agta (PHL)
Eastern Cham (VNM)
En (MMR)
Faire Atta (PHL)
Gazhuo (CHN)
Gong (THA)
Green Gelao (VNM)
Hlersu (CHN)
Hoanya (CHN)
Hpun (MMR)
Hu (CHN)
Hung (LAO; VNM)
Iduh (2) (LAO; VNM)
Isarog Agta (PHL)
Jahai (MYS)
Jinuo (CHN)
Jiongnai Bunu (CHN)
Juk (LAO)
Kaco’ (KHM)
Kanakanabu (CHN)
Kasong (KHM; THA)
Katabaga (PHL)
Kathu (CHN)
Kavalan (CHN)
Kensiw (2) (MYS; THA)
Kentak (MYS)

Ketangalan (CHN)
Khang Quang Lam
(VNM)

Khmin (CHN)
Kraol (KHM)
Kravet (KHM)
Kri (LAO)
Krueng (KHM)
Kuay (KHM)
Kulun (CHN)
Lachi (VNM)
Laemae (CHN)
Laghuu (VNM)
Laha (2) (VNM)
Lai (CHN)
Laji (CHN)
Lajia (CHN)
Lalo (CHN)
Lamongse (IND)
Lamu (CHN)
Lanoh (MYS)
Laomian (2) (CHN; MMR)
Lavua (THA)
Lua (THA)
Mak (CHN)
Maleng (LAO)
Mang (2) (CHN; VNM)
Maniq (THA)
Maonan (CHN)
May (LAO; VNM)
Miyako (JPN)
Mlabri (LAO; THA)
Mo’ang (2) (CHN; VNM)
Mok (3) (CHN; LAO; MMR;
THA)

Moklen (MMR; THA)
Mon (MMR; THA)
Mpi (THA)
Mru (MMR)
Mt. Iraya Agta (PHL)
Muda (CHN)
Muji (CHN)
Mulam (CHN)
Nataoran (CHN)
Nguon (VNM)
Northern Alta (PHL)
Numao Bunu (CHN)
Nung Ven (VNM)
Nyah Kur (THA)
Nyoe (THA)
Okinawan (JPN)
Paiwan (CHN)
Pakan (CHN)
Palaung (MMR)
Pale (MMR)
Papora (CHN)
Pasing (LAO)
Patani Malay (THA)
Patua (CHN)
Pazeh (CHN)
Pear (KHM)
Phalok (THA)
Phnong (KHM)
Phong (LAO)
Phula (2) (CHN; VNM)
Phunoi (LAO)
Pong (LAO)
Pupeo (CHN)
Pyu (MMR)
Pyuma (CHN)

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Rao (CHN)
Red Gelao (2) (CHN; VNM)
Riang (MMR)
Ruc (LAO; VNM)
Rukai (CHN)
Rumai (MMR)
Saaroa (CHN)
Sach (LAO; VNM)
Saek (LAO; THA)
Saisiyat (CHN)
Sak (2) (BGD; MMR)
Samatao (CHN)
Samatu (CHN)
Samei (CHN)
Samrai (KHM)
Samray (KHM; THA)
Samre (KHM)
Sangkong (CHN)
Sanyi (CHN)
She (CHN)
Sila (LAO; VNM)
Siraiya (CHN)
So-ng (KHM)
Southern Ayta (PHL)
Stieng (KHM)
Swoeng (LAO)
Tai Daeng (LAO; VNM)
Tai Neua (LAO)
Tailoi (MMR)
Tanglang (CHN)
Taokas (CHN)
Taroko (CHN)
Tayal (CHN)
Tempuan (KHM)
Thao (CHN)

Thavung (2) (LAO; THA)
Theen (LAO)
Triw (LAO)
Tsou (CHN)
Tum (LAO)
U (CHN)
Urak Lawoi (2) (MYS; THA)
Utsat (CHN)
Wa (MMR)
Western Cham (KHM)
White Gelao (VNM)
Wunai Bunu (CHN)
Wuse (CHN)
Yaeyama (JPN)
Yami (CHN)
Yaw (MMR)
Yerong (CHN)
Yonaguni (JPN)
Younuo Bunu (CHN)
Zaozou (CHN)

South-eastern Asia Map 23
INDIA

Hpun
Chintaw

Palaung

Mang

Laomian

Bawm

Pale
Riang

MYANMAR

Bana
Bisu
Phalok
Mlabri

wee
n

NAYPYIDAW

Sal

20°N

Bay of
Pyu

Bengal

Chiang
Mai
Lavua

Mpi

ng
ko
Me

Cosung

CHINA

Khmin
Sangkong Muda

MYANMAR

Savannakhet

Samray

Mang
Khang
Quang
Lam

Chepya
Pasing

LAO
P.D.R.

Pearl
R

iver

Patua

Hong Kong

Kavalan

Kasong

Chuang
Samrai

Pear
Samre

Hainan
Utsat

Rukai
Paiwan

Gulf of

CHINA

Central
Cagayan
Agta

Red
Gelao White
Nung Ven
Gelao
Pupeo

Triw

Huê

Faire Atta

Mo'ang

Western
Cham

VIET NAM

Isarog Agta
Mt. Iraya Agta

Katabaga
Southern Ayta

Sea

Eastern Cham

Ho Chi Minh City

Batak

Maniq

Patani Malay

Urak Lawoi

Zamboanga

Kensiw
Kentak

100°E

Mindanao

Sulu Sea

Kensiw

Strait of
Malacca

10°N

PHILIPPINES

Moklen

Banda Aceh

Cebu

Palawan

Thailand

10°N

Sea
Camarines Norte Agta

Chru

Stieng
Chrau

Chung

Alabat Island
Agta

MANILA

China

Phnong

So-ng

Philippine

Northern Alta

South

Krueng
Kaco'
Kuay
Kraol Tempuan

Extinct
(since the 1950s)

Arta

Bataan Ayta

Kravet

Severely
endangered

Phula

Juk
Brao

Definitely
endangered

Critically
endangered

Dupaninan Agta

VIET NAM

Dakkang

Babuyan Islands

Ata

Phuket

Vulnerable

Dicamay Agta

Luzon

Ocean

Taiwan,
China

it
n Stra
Luzo

Green Gelao

CAMBODIA

PHNOM PENH

VIET
NAM

Urak Lawoi

Pacific

Nataoran Yaeyama
Taroko
Amis
Bunun
Tsou
Pyuma

Siraiya

Kanakanabu
Saaroa

Miyako
Yonaguni

Taipei

Thao
Hoanya

Haikou

Iduh

Nyoe

Phunoi
Amok
Tailoi
Angku

Nanning

Guangzhou

Basay

Yami

Bru

Chong
Sila

She

Jiongnai Bunu

Saek
Hung
LAO
Tum
Thavung
Pong Phong
P.D.R. Aheu
Arem
May
Kri
VIENTIANE
Sach
Maleng
Ruc
Nguon
Thavung

BANGKOK

Hu

Akeu
Jinuo

Wa

Lua

Gong
Chung

Côông

Lajia

Tai Daeng

Theen
Iduh

Nyah Kur

Sea

Wunai Bunu

Macau

Chatong
Swoeng

Andaman

Ocean

Pazeh

Okinawan

Ketangalan
Kulun
Saisiyat
Taokas
Papora
Babuza

HANOI

Mok

Mon

Indian

CHINA

Tayal

Mulam

Baheng

THAILAND

Yangon

Wuse

Maonan

Ganzhou

Laha (Son La)
Tai Neua

En

Danaw

120°E

Baheng

Lachi
Laji
Laha (Lao Cai)

Yaw
Sak

Mok

Phula

g

Mru
Sak

U

110°E

Buyang
Yerong

Mo'ang

n
ko

Chittagong

Muji

Rumai

Me

Central Himalaya map

Ir ra
wad
dy

BANGLADESH

Red Gelao
Aluo
Samei
Younuo Bunu
Sanyi
Chesu
Lalo
Lai
Hlersu
Numao
Samatao Ayizi
Samatu
Kathu Bunu
Laomian
Pakan
Gazhuo
Laghuu

Language Vitality

Bola

Rao
Mak

Lamu
Zaozou Tanglang

Ta
iw
Str an
a it

Laemae

tra

mapu

Brah

Abai Sungai
0

MALAYSIA

250

110°E

500 km

Kota Kinabalu

MALAYSIA

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

120°E

Davao
The designations employed and the presentation
of material on this map do not imply the expression
of anyopinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO
concerning the legal status of any country, territory,
city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the
delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Map 24 Western Austronesia
Abai Sungai (MYS)
Adabe (TLS)
Ampibabo Lauje (IDN)
Andio (IDN)
Aputai (IDN)
Bahonsuai (IDN)
Baleasang (IDN)
Baras (IDN)
Batek (MYS)
Besoa (IDN)
Boano (IDN)
Budong-Budong (IDN)
Busoa (IDN)
Che Wong (MYS)
Dakka (IDN)
Dampal (IDN)
Dampelas (IDN)
Dondo (IDN)
Enggano (IDN)
Habu (TLS)
Helong (IDN)
Hukumina (IDN)
Ibu (IDN)

Jah Hut (MYS)
Jahai (MYS)
Javindo Creole (IDN)
Kadai (IDN)
Kahumamahon Saluan (IDN)
Kairui-Midiki (TLS)
Kalao (IDN)
Kanowit (MYS)
Kao (IDN)
Kayeli (IDN)
Kenaboi (MYS)
Kensiw (2) (MYS; THA)
Kentak (MYS)
Kodeoha (IDN)
Koroni (IDN)
Kristang (MYS)
Laiyolo (IDN)
Lanoh (MYS)
Lauje (IDN)
Lemolang (IDN)
Lengilu (IDN)
Liliali (IDN)
Lisela (IDN)

Lolak (IDN)
Lom (IDN)
Mah Meri (MYS)
Maku’a (TLS)
Maniq (THA)
Menri’ (MYS)
Moksela (IDN)
Napu (IDN)
Naueti (TLS)
Oirata (IDN)
Orang Hulu (MYS)
Orang Kanaq (MYS)
Orang Seletar (MYS)
Padoe (IDN)
Palu’e (IDN)
Palumata (IDN)
Panasuan (IDN)
Patani Malay (THA)
Peco’ Creole (IDN)
Pendau (IDN)
Punan Batu (MYS)
Rahambuu (IDN)
Semai (MYS)

Semaq Beri (MYS)
Semelai (MYS)
Seru (MYS)
Sian (MYS)
Taba (IDN)
Taje (IDN)
Tajio (IDN)
Taloki (IDN)
Talondo (IDN)
Temiar (MYS)
Temuan (MYS)
Tialo (IDN)
Tobada’ (IDN)
Tomadino (IDN)
Tombelala (IDN)
Toratán (IDN)
Totoli (IDN)
Urak Lawoi (MYS)
Waima’a (TLS)
Waru (IDN)
Wotu (IDN)

52
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Western Austronesia Map 24
110°E

100°E

Nicobar
Islands

Phuket
Kensiw
Indian Subcontinent map

Maniq
Patani
Malay

Che

Kentak

t
rai
St

a
cc
ala
M
of

Medan

Lanoh
Temiar

Abai Sungai

China

Kota Kinabalu

PHILIPPINES

Sea

BANDAR SERI BEGAWAN

BRUNEI
DARUSSALAM

Semaq Beri

Lengilu

KUALA LUMPUR
Mah Meri
Kristang

Sumatra

Pulau
Nias

Davao

Zamboanga

South

Jahai
Menri'

Batek
Semai
Temuan

Mindanao

Sulu Sea

Wong
Kota
Baharu
Jah Hut

Kensiw

Urak Lawoi

Banda Aceh

120°E

THAILAND

Punan Batu

Semelai
Kenaboi

MALAYSIA

Orang
Kanaq

Orang
Seletar

Celebes Sea

Sian

Kanowit

Seru

Orang
Hulu

SINGAPORE

Ibu

Borneo

Kuching

Totoli
Dondo
Dampal
Tialo
Ampibabo Lauje
Boano
Dampelas

SINGAPORE
Pontianak

Baleasang

Kalimantan

0°

Lauje

Samarinda

Palu

Banjarmasin

Billiton

Bengkulu

Andio
Kadai

s

Palembang

Molucca Sea

Padoe
Tobada'
Bahonsuai
Panasuan
Tombelala
Koroni
Lemolang
Tomadino
Rahambuu
Dakka

Mak
assa
r Str
ait

Rengat

Taba

Kahumamahon
Saluan

cca

Pulau
Siberut

Baras
Budong-Budong
Talondo

Lolak

olu

Lom

Taje
Napu
Besoa

Hukumina

Wotu

Lisela

Palumata

Liliali

Kayeli
Moksela

Waru

Sulawesi

Kao

Toratán

M

Padang

Pendau
Tajio

Manado

Buru

Kendari
Taloki

Kodeoha

Vulnerable

Indian

Enggano

Java Sea

Language Vitality

Peco' Creole
Definitely
endangered

Ocean

INDONESIA

Makassar
Busoa

JAKARTA

Javindo Creole

Madura
Severely
endangered

Bandung

Java

Kalao

Surabaya

Waima'a

Bali Lombok Sumbawa

Yogyakarta

Palu'e

Habu

Timor
Extinct
(since the 1950s)

Sumba

Christmas Island
110°E

0

250

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

500 km

Aputai
Oirata

Adabe

DILI

Denpasar

Critically
endangered

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Banda Sea

Laiyolo

Maku'a
Naueti
KairuiMidiki

TIMOR-LESTE

Helong

10°S

Timor Sea
120°E

Map 25 New Guinea

54

Abaga (PNG)
Ainba (PNG)
Ak (PNG)
Alune (IDN)
Amahai (IDN)
Anuki (PNG)
Anus (IDN)
Arawun (PNG)
Arguni (IDN)
Ari (PNG)
Aribwatsa (PNG)
As (IDN)
Atemble (PNG)
Auye (IDN)
Awera (IDN)
Awyi (IDN)
Bagupi (PNG)
Bedoanas (IDN)
Benggoi (IDN)
Bepour (PNG)
Biak (IDN)
Bikaru (PNG)
Bilakura (PNG)
Bina (PNG)
Bonerif (IDN)
Bonggo (IDN)
Bosilewa (PNG)
Bothar (PNG)
Budibud (PNG)
Bukiyip (PNG)
Bulgebi (PNG)
Bumbita Arapesh (PNG)
Burate (IDN)
Dabra (IDN)
Damal (IDN)

Demisa (IDN)
Dengalu (PNG)
Doga (PNG)
Dorro (PNG)
Doutai (IDN)
Dubu (IDN)
Dumun (PNG)
Duriankere (IDN)
Dusner (IDN)
Duwet (PNG)
Emplawas (IDN)
Erokwanas (IDN)
Faita (PNG)
Fayu (IDN)
Foya (IDN)
Garuwahi (PNG)
Gebe (IDN)
Getmata (PNG)
Gorap (IDN)
Gorovu (PNG)
Grass Koiari (PNG)
Guranalum (PNG)
Hermit (PNG)
Hoti (IDN)
Hulung (IDN)
Iresim (IDN)
Isirawa (IDN)
Iteri (PNG)
Itik (IDN)
Iwaidja (AUS)
Kaibobo (IDN)
Kaiep (PNG)
Kaiy (IDN)
Kaki Ae (PNG)
Kalamo (PNG)

Kalaw Lagaw Ya (AUS)
Kamarian (IDN)
Kamasa (PNG)
Kandas (PNG)
Kaniet (PNG)
Kaningara (PNG)
Kapori (IDN)
Karami (PNG)
Karas (IDN)
Karore (PNG)
Kawucha (PNG)
Kayupulau (IDN)
Keder (IDN)
Kembra (IDN)
Kofei (IDN)
Koitabu (PNG)
Koneraw (IDN)
Kowaki (PNG)
Kowiai (IDN)
Kuot (PNG)
Kwansu (IDN)
Kwerisa (IDN)
Lae (PNG)
Laua (PNG)
Laxudumau (PNG)
Legenyem (IDN)
Liki (IDN)
Likum (PNG)
Lola (IDN)
Loun (IDN)
Magori (PNG)
Mahigi (PNG)
Makolkol (PNG)
Mander (IDN)
Mansim (IDN)

Mapia (IDN)
Maremgi (IDN)
Mari (PNG)
Marrgu (AUS)
Massep (IDN)
Mawak (PNG)
Meriam Mir (AUS)
Mindiri (PNG)
Moere (PNG)
Momuna (IDN)
Mor (IDN)
Moraori (IDN)
Mosimo (PNG)
Mulaha (PNG)
Murik (PNG)
Musan (PNG)
Musom (PNG)
Mussau-Emira (PNG)
Mwatebu (PNG)
Nafi (PNG)
Naka’ela (IDN)
Narau (IDN)
Nauna (PNG)
Nila (2) (IDN)
Numbani (PNG)
Nusa Laut (IDN)
Obokuitai (IDN)
Onin (IDN)
Onjab (PNG)
Ormu (IDN)
Ouma (PNG)
Papi (PNG)
Paulohi (IDN)
Pauwi (IDN)
Piame (PNG)

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Piru (IDN)
Piu (PNG)
Puari (PNG)
Pyu (IDN)
Salas (IDN)
Samosa (PNG)
Saparua (IDN)
Saponi (IDN)
Sause (IDN)
Sene (PNG)
Senggi (IDN)
Sengseng (PNG)
Sepa (PNG)
Sera (PNG)
Serili (IDN)
Sissano (PNG)
Sobei (IDN)
Somm (PNG)
Suarmin (PNG)
Sumariup (PNG)
Susuami (PNG)
Taap (PNG)
Taiap (PNG)
Taikat (IDN)
Tandia (IDN)
Tarpia (IDN)
Taulil (PNG)
Tause (IDN)
Taworta (IDN)
Te’un (2) (IDN)
Tench (PNG)
Tiwi (AUS)
Tobati (IDN)
Tobian (PLW)
Tofanma (IDN)

Turaka (PNG)
Uhunduni (IDN)
Ujir (IDN)
Usku (IDN)
Usu (PNG)
Vehes (PNG)
Wab (PNG)
Wano (IDN)
Warapu (PNG)
Wari (IDN)
Woria (IDN)
Yapunda (PNG)
Yarawata (PNG)
Yarawi (PNG)
Yimas (PNG)
Yoba (PNG)
Yoki (IDN)

New Guinea Map 25
140°E

Tobian

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Bepour
Moere

Mawak

Kowaki

Pacific

Bilakura
Mosimo

Mapia

Ocean

Yarawata
Gebe

Legenyem

0°

Samosa
Bagupi

Biak
Sobei

As

Waigeo

Mansim
Massep

Piru

Bedoanas
Erokwanas

Benggoi
Te'un

Hoti
Salas

Mor

Tandia

Karas

Seram
Island

Amahai
Paulohi
Saparua
Kamarian
Alune

Kowiai

INDONESIA
Kai

Kaibobo

Banda Sea
Nusa Laut

South
Moluccas
Islands

Te'un
Emplawas

Kofei

Kaniet
Mussau-Emira

Momuna

Ujir

Kaningara
Yimas

Suarmin

Irian
Jaya

Kalamo

Aru

Karami

Koneraw

Kaki Ae
Mari

Arafura Sea

Moraori

Gulf of

Dorro

Laxudumau
Kuot

New Ireland

Bismarck Sea

Karore

Tiwi

130°E

PAPUA NEW
GUINEA

Koitabu

Grass
Koiari

Magori

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

0

100

Solomon Sea

200 km

Budibud

Onjab

Coral
AUSTRALIA

Sengseng

Yarawi

Tiwi Islands

Gulf of
AUSTRALIA
Carpentaria 140°E

Guranalum

New Britain

Kalaw Lagaw Ya

Iwaidja

Kandas

Getmata

Anuki Doga
Turaka

Meriam Mir

Taulil
Makolkol

PORT
Mulaha
Yoba
MORESBY
Laua Bina
Ouma

Torres Strait

Marrgu

Tench

Manus Island

Papua

Daru

Bothar

Severely
endangered

Extinct
(since the 1950s)

Vehes
Kamasa
Dengalu
Susuami
Numbani

Ari

Serili

Timor Sea

Nauna

Hermit

Arawun
Dumun
Mindiri
Atemble Usu
Bulgebi
Somm
Duwet
Wab
Faita
Musom
Taap
Sene
Lae
Abaga
Nafi
Piu
Aribwatsa
Kawucha

Mahigi

Tanimbar

Likum

Definitely
endangered

Critically
endangered

Isirawa

Lola

Nila

Liki

Keder
Bonerif
Anus
Maremgi

Ormu Kayupulau
Tarpia
Tobati Puari
Kwansu
Sera
Foya
Warapu
Mander Itik
Awyi
Taikat
Demisa
Kaiy Bonggo Sause
Sissano
Taworta Narau
Obokuitai
Tause
Yapunda Bukiyip
Ainba
Iresim
Senggi
Fayu
Kaiep
Usku
Ak
Murik
Wari Dabra Kapori
Wano
Auye
Musan
Taiap
Bumbita
Doutai
Iteri
Sepa
Arapesh
Kembra
Kwerisa
Uhunduni
Sumariup
Tofanma
Bikaru
Damal
Piame
Dubu
Pyu
Papi
Gorovu

Woria
Dusner Awera
Burate

Arguni
Onin

Nila

Yoki
Pauwi

Saponi

Duriankere
Naka'ela
Hulung
Loun

Vulnerable

South
Language Vitality

130°E
Gorap

Sea

150°E

Bosilewa
Mwatebu

Garuwahi

10°S

Map 26 Australia
Adnyamathanha (AUS)
Alawa (AUS)
Anindilyakwa (AUS)
Antakirinya (AUS)
Arabana (AUS)
Arrernte (AUS)
Badala (AUS)
Banjima (AUS)
Bardi (AUS)
Bundjalung (AUS)
Bunuba (AUS)
Dharawal (AUS)
Dharug (AUS)
Dhurga (AUS)
Djinang (AUS)
Dungidjau (AUS)
Dyirbal (AUS)
Gaagudju (AUS)
Gajerrong (AUS)
Gamilaraay (AUS)
Ganggalidda (AUS)
Garrwa (AUS)
Gooniyandi (AUS)
Gumbaynggirr (AUS)
Gupapuyngu (AUS)
Gurrgoni (AUS)

Guugu Yimidhirr (AUS)
Helong (IDN)
Jaminjung (AUS)
Jawoyn (AUS)
Jingulu (AUS)
Karajarri (AUS)
Kaurna (AUS)
Kayardild (AUS)
Kija (AUS)
Koko Bera (AUS)
Kukatja (AUS)
Kuku Yalanji (AUS)
Kunbarlang (AUS)
Kunjen (AUS)
Kunwinjku (AUS)
Kurrama (AUS)
Kurtjar (AUS)
Kuuku Ya’u (AUS)
Kuurinji (AUS)
Lardil (AUS)
Madngele (AUS)
Malak Malak (AUS)
Mangarla (AUS)
Mangarrayi (AUS)
Maringarr (AUS)
Marrisyefin (AUS)

Marrithiyel (AUS)
Martuwangka (AUS)
Maung (AUS)
Miriwoong (AUS)
Mudburra (AUS)
Nakkara (AUS)
Ngaanyatjarra (AUS)
Ngaatjatjara (AUS)
Ngalakan (AUS)
Ngaliwuru (AUS)
Ngalkbun (AUS)
Ngandi (AUS)
Ngangikurunggurr (AUS)
Ngardi (AUS)
Ngarinman (AUS)
Ngarinyin (AUS)
Ngarla (AUS)
Ngarluma (AUS)
Nunggubuyu (AUS)
Nyamal (AUS)
Nyangumarta (AUS)
Nyikina (AUS)
Paakantyi (AUS)
Pintupi (AUS)
Pitjantjatjara (AUS)
Rembarrnga (AUS)

Ritharrngu (AUS)
Thaayorre (AUS)
Tharkarri (AUS)
Umpila (AUS)
Waanyi (AUS)
Wagiman (AUS)
Wajarri (AUS)
Walmajarri (AUS)
Wambaya (AUS)
Wangaaybuwan (AUS)
Wangkumara (AUS)
Wardaman (AUS)
Warlpiri (AUS)
Warnman (AUS)
Warumungu (AUS)
Wik Mungkan (AUS)
Wik Ngathan (AUS)
Wik Ngencherr (AUS)
Wiradjuri (AUS)
Worrorra (AUS)
Wunambal (AUS)
Yan-nhangu (AUS)
Yankunytjatjara (AUS)
Yanyuwa (AUS)
Yiiji (AUS)
Yir Yoront (AUS)

56
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Australia Map 26
Timor

Helong

Kupang

Sumba

10°S
Maung

Ocean

Worrorra

Broome

Ngarinyin

Miriwoong

Ngarla

Ngarluma
Kurrama

Kuurinji

Ngalakan
Mangarrayi
Yanyuwa

Ganggalidda

Kayardild

Garrwa
Jingulu
Wambaya

Mangarla

Guugu Yimidhirr

Cooktown
Kunjen

Kuku Yalanji

Yir Yoront

Cairns

Waanyi

Dyirbal

Kurtjar

Townsville

NORTHERN

Warlpiri

Kukatja

South
Pacific

Mount Isa

Pintupi

AUSTRALIA

Ngaanyatjarra

Badala

Wa
r re

Ngaatjatjara

WESTERN

QUEENSLAND

Alice Springs
Arrernte

Martuwangka

Tharkarri

Pitjantjatjara

Dungidjau

Antakirinya

Wajarri

Brisbane

Wangkumara

Yankunytjatjara

AUSTRALIA

SOUTH
Arabana

Bundjalung

AUSTRALIA
30°S

Kalgoorlie

Wangaaybuwan
Paakantyi

ng
rli
Da NEW

n Bight
stralia
u
A
t
Grea

SOUTH WALES

Kaurna

Albany

Port Lincoln

Sydney
M

Kangaroo Island

ur

CANBERRA
r ay

Sea

Melbourne
130°E

0

250

500 km

140°E

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Dharawal
Dhurga

Tasman

VICTORIA

Definitely
Severely
Critically
Extinct
endangered endangered endangered (since the 1950s)

Newcastle

Dharug

Wiradjuri

Adelaide

Language Vitality

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Gamilaraay
Gumbaynggirr

Adnyamathanha

Perth
Esperance

20°S

Ocean

TERRITORY
Warnman

Vulnerable

Sea

Wik Ngencherr
Wik Ngathan

Warumungu
Ngardi

10°S

Coral

Umpila

Thaayorre
Koko Bera
Lardil

Tennant Creek

Walmajarri

Nyamal

Groot Eylandt

Alawa
Mudburra

Banjima

Geraldton

Gulf of

Gooniyandi

Karajarri
Nyangumarta

Ngarinman

Kija

Alotau

Kuuku Ya'u

Wik Mungkan

Anindilyakwa

Wardaman
Ngaliwuru

Bunuba
Nyikina

PORT MORESBY

New Guinea map

Gupapuyngu

Jawoyn

Yiiji
Bardi

Iwaidja

Carpentaria
Jaminjung

Nunggubuyu

Torres Strait

PAPUA NEW GUINEA

Gajerrong

Wunambal

20°S

Marrgu

Daru

140°E

Arafura Sea

Gaagudju
Rembarrnga
Wagiman

Ngalkbun

Port Hedland

Tiwi

Madngele
Malak Malak
Marrithiyel
Marrisyefin
Maringarr
Ngangikurunggurr

Indian

Ngandi

Kunbarlang
Gurrgoni
Nakkara
Ritharrngu

Timor Sea
Tiwi Islands

Yan-nhangu
Djinang

Kunwinjku

130°E

TIMOR-LESTE

go

INDONESIA

150°E

30°S

Map 27 Pacific
Austral dialects (PYF)
Chamorro (GUM)
Hawaiian (USA)
Kapingamarangi (FSM)
Kosraean (FSM; NRU)
Mangareva (PYF)
Manihiki (COK)
Maori (NZL)
Mokilese (FSM)
Mortlockese (FSM)
Namonuito (FSM)

Nauruan (NRU)
Ngatikese Men’s Creole
(FSM)

Niuean (NIU)
Norfolk-Pitcairn (2) (NFK; PCN)
Nukuoro (FSM)
Paafang (FSM)
Penrhyn (COK)
Pingelapese (FSM)
Pukapukan (COK)
Puluwat (FSM)

Rapa (PYF)
Rapanui (CHL)
Rarotongan (COK)
Rotuman (FJI)
Satawal (FSM)
Sonsorol (PLW)
Tokelauan (TKL)
Tuamotuan (PYF)
Tuvaluan (TUV)
Ulithian (FSM)
Woleaian (FSM)

58
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Pacific Map 27
140°E

160°E

180°E

140°W

Hawaiian

120°W

MEXICO

Chamorro

Central America
map

Guam

Ulithian

Mortlockese
Namonuito

Sonsorol

PALAU

Hawaiian Islands

Northern
Mariana
Islands

Woleaian Satawal

Ngatikese
Men's Creole

MARSHALL

Paafang

Puluwat

FEDERATED
STATES OF
MICRONESIA

South

Kosraean
Nukuoro
Kapingamarangi

New Guinea map

10°N

Mokilese
ISLANDS
Pingelapese

PAPUA
NEW
GUINEA

Ocean

K I R I BAT I

NAURU

INDONESIA

Pacific

Northern Line
Islands

Nauruan

SOLOMON
Tuvaluan

ISLANDS

Tokelauan

TUVALU

Pukapukan

Tokelau
Rotuman

Solomon Is. map

Wallis-et
Futuna

Coral
Sea

FIJI

VANUATU

SAMOA

Penrhyn

American
Samoa

10°S

Manihiki
Tuamotuan

French
Polynesia

Niuean

New
Caledonia

Niue

Rarotongan
Mangareva

Austral dialects

TONGA

Norfolk-Pitcairn

Cook
Island
s

AUSTRALIA
Southern Vanuatu and
New Caledonia map

Pitcairn

Rapa

Rapanui

Norfolk-Pitcairn

30°S
0

Tasman Sea
Australia map

500

1 000

1 500 km

Language Vitality

Maori

NEW-ZEALAND

Vulnerable

Tasmania
140°E

250

Definitely
Severely
Critically
Extinct
endangered endangered endangered (since the 1950s)

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

160°E

180°E

160°W

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

140°W

120°W

Map 28 Solomon Islands and Northern Vanuatu
Asumboa (SLB)
Blablanga (SLB)
Budibud (PNG)
Dorig (VUT)
Dororo (SLB)
Faghani (SLB)
Gao (SLB)
Hiw (VUT)
Hoava (SLB)
Kazukuru (SLB)
Kokota (SLB)
Koro (VUT)
Laghu (SLB)
Lakon (VUT)
Lehali (VUT)
Lemerig (VUT)

Löyöp (VUT)
Mwesen (VUT)
Olrat (VUT)
Oroha (SLB)
Papapana (PNG)
Ririo (SLB)
Savo (SLB)
Tanema (SLB)
Tanimbili (SLB)
Teanu (SLB)
Uruava (PNG)
Vano (SLB)
Vera’a (VUT)
Volow (VUT)
Zazao (SLB)

60
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Solomon Islands and Northern Vanuatu Map 28
5°S

155°E

PAPUA

160°E

Papapana
Uruava

NEW

Kieta

GUINEA

Ririo

Bougainville

Laghu

Kazukuru
Dororo
Hoava

Kokota
Zazao

Ocean

Blablanga

Buala

Gao

New Georgia Islands
Savo

Budibud

Auki

HONIARA

PAPUA

Malaita

Oroha

Guadalcanal
Island

NEW
GUINEA

Pacific

ISLANDS

Santa
Isabel
Gizo

South

SOLOMON

Choiseul

10°S

5°S

165°E

10°S
Faghani

Santa
Cruz
Islands

Kirakira

Solomon
Sea

San Cristóbal

Tanimbili

Asumboa

Teanu
Vano
Tanema

Rennell

Coral Sea
Hiw

Torres
Islands

Language Vitality

Vulnerable

VANUATU

Definitely
Severely
Critically
Extinct
endangered endangered endangered (since the 1950s)

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

160°E

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

165°E

De Santo
Island

Lehali

Löyöp
Volow

Lemerig
Vera'a
Lakon
Olrat
Koro

Mwesen
Dorig

Banks
Islands

Map 29 Southern Vanuatu and New Caledonia
Amblong (VUT)
Aore (VUT)
Araki (VUT)
Arha (NCL)
Arho (NCL)
Aveteian (VUT)
Baki (VUT)
Bangsa (VUT)
Bierebo (VUT)
Bieria (VUT)
Caac (NCL)
Drubea (NCL)
Emae (VUT)
Fagauvea (2) (NCL)
Fwâi (NCL)
Ifo (VUT)
Jawe (NCL)
Kumak (NCL)

Labo (VUT)
Lorediakarkar (VUT)
Mafea (VUT)
Malmariv (VUT)
Maragus (VUT)
Matanvat (VUT)
Mores (VUT)
Naati (VUT)
Naman (VUT)
Nasarian (VUT)
Navwien (VUT)
Neku (NCL)
Nemi (NCL)
Nisvai (VUT)
Nivat (VUT)
Niviar (VUT)
Orowe (NCL)
Pije (NCL)

Polonomombauk (VUT)
Pwaamèi (NCL)
Pwapwa (NCL)
Repanbitip (VUT)
Shark Bay (VUT)
Sishee (NCL)
Ske (VUT)
Sorsorian (VUT)
Sowa (VUT)
Tambotalo (VUT)
Tape (VUT)
Tiri (NCL)
Tolomako (VUT)
Tutuba (VUT)
Ura (VUT)
Voh-Koné dialects (NCL)
Xaragure (NCL)

62
Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Southern Vanuatu and New Caledonia Map 29
164°E

166°E

168°E

166°E

168°E

Language Vitality

Vulnerable

Espiritu Santo
Tolomako

Definitely
Severely
Critically
Extinct
endangered endangered endangered (since the 1950s)

Polonomombauk
Tambolato
Nivat ; Niviar
Bangsa

20°S

Kumak

Caac

Lorediakarkar

16°S

Mores
Amblong

Mafea

Araki

Aore Tutuba

Maragus

Pentecôte

Tape
Naman

Nasarian
Aveteian
Labo
Naati

Repanbitip

Baki

Fagauvea

Wé

Bieria

Epi

Emae

VANUATU

Îles
Loyauté

16°S
Bierebo

Sorsorian
Navwien

Pwaamèi

Ambrym

Nisvai

Malampa

Fagauvea

Fwâi
Pije

Pwapwa

Sowa
Ske

Matanvat

Jawe
Nemi

Maéwo

Shark Bay

Malmariv

Coral Sea

20°S

170°E

Voh-Koné dialects
Arho
Arha

Orowe

PORT-VILA

Neku

New

Tiri
Sishee

Caledonia

22°S

Efaté

Xaragure
Drubea

22°S 18°S

18°S
Ura

Nouméa

Coral Sea

Erromango

South
Pacific
Ocean

Îles
des Pins

Ifo

South
Pacific
Ocean

Tanna

20°S
0

50

20°S

100 km

The designations employed and the presentation of material on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

168°E

24°S

0

50

166°E

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Anatom

100 km

168°E

170°E

Languages are not only tools of
communication, they also reflect a
view of the world. Languages are
vehicles of value systems and cultural
expressions and are an essential
component of the living heritage of
humanity. Yet, many of them are in
danger of disappearing.
UNESCO’s Atlas of the World’s
Languages in Danger tries
to raise awareness on language
endangerment.
This third edition has been completely
revised and expanded to include new
series of maps and new points of view.

Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger

Atlas
of the World’s
Languages
in
Danger

